MUHURTHA 

OR 

ELECTIONAL ASTROLOGY 


BY 

BANGALORE VENKATA RAMAN, 

D.SC..F.R. A.S.. M.R.A.S.. 

EDITOR, THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE 


“fRST EDITION 

1 948 


\Wam'an publications 

BANGALORE— 3 
All Rights Reserved 


Price per copy ] 
Rs. 7/8 or Sh. 15j 


Postage 

Extra 



BY THE SAME AUTHOR 


Astrology foe Beginners 
Astrology and Modern Thout 
A Manual of Hindu Astrolog 
Hindu Predictive Astrology 
Grab a and Bhava Balas 
How to Judge a Horoscope 
Hindu Progressed Horoscope 
Bhavartha Ratnakara 
Ayurveda 

Three Hundred Important Combinations 
Your Next Nine Years 
Indian States Souvenir 
World Predictions for 1941 to 1945 A. D, 
World Prospects in 1948 and 1949 A. D. 
Studies in Jaimini Astrology (in Press) 



PREFACE 


There have been many books in recent years on 
astrology but most of them deal with predictive astrology 
proper. Muhurtha or Electional Astrology, whilst no 
doubt an important adjunct to horoscopy has got its own 
distinct place in the general scheme of astrological litera- 
ture. There is perhaps no human activity in the. 
modern times that does not seek the aid of Muhurtha. \ 
The justification of this book is therefore that it tries to 
show that astrology encourages human effort by asking I 
amantodothe right thing at the right moment. Thej 
aim of the book is to present to the reader in a concise 
form all the essential principles of Muhurtha, so that he 
could make use of them in all walks of life. A vast 
literature is extant in Samskrit on this subject. I have 
only endeavoured to present in these pages just the 
essential principles culled out from standard w'orks. 
Where differences were noticeable between two standard 
works, I have advanced my o%vn views the justification 
being my humble experience in this line extending over 
nearly 20 years during which time I have dealt with 
thousands of election charts touching almost all human 
activities. The reader is at liberty to reject my opinions 
if he feels they do not merit his acceptance. 

The aim of astrology is to dispel the- fear of thej 
unknown and to give scope for the free play of effort. 
And Muhurtha just supplies this want. This treatise is by j 



11 

no means complete. The subject is vast. Yet I have 
gathered information from many acknowledged sources, 
which I am sure, will be found to be of the greatest use to 
the modern man so that instead of merely passing through 
the formality of astrological consultation, by entrusting 
the election of a Muhurtha to quacks and montebanks, 
lie may be enabled to so time his activities as to move in 
harmony with the laws of nature. 


Bangalore! 

1 - 7-1943 . 


B. V. RAMAN 



CONTENTS 





Page 

Chapter I 

The Importance of Muhurtha 

I 


II 

General Hints 

9 


III 

The Birth Star and The Birth Moon 

17 

„ 

IV 

Influence of Constellations 

23 


V 

Special Adverse Yogas and Their 




Neutralisation 

27 

„ 

VI 

On Certain Special Yogas 

33 

,, 

VII 

Prenatal Ceremonies — 

40 


VIII 

Post-natal Ceremonies .... 

53 

«• 

IX 

Marriage 

67 


X 

Elections Concerning General 




Matters 

105 

M 

XI 

Elections Pertaining to Education .... 

114 


XII 

House Building 

120 

„ 

XIII 

Agriculture and Farming 

140 

„ 

XIV 

Travel 

152 


XV 

Medical Elections 

162 

„ 

XVI 

Public Matters 

169 


XVII 

Miscellaneous Elections 

174 


XVIII 

Summary 

180 



Appendix 

193 



Bibliography .... 

201 



Index 

203 



MUHURTHA 

OR 

ELECT10NAL ASTROLOGY : 

BY 

B, V. RAMAN, D.Sc., F.R.A.S., M.R.A.S. 

CHAPTER I 

THE IMPORTANCE OF MUHURTHA 

The value of Time is inestimable. All 

objects in nature are produced in Time, deve- 
loped in Time and destroyed in Time., The 
truth of these statements requires no further 
proof. It stands unchallenged. Here we have 
a grand problem for solution. If the creative, 
protective and destructive forces are embedded 
in the all-Powerfui Time recognised as the great 
Kalnpursha in the astrological literature, then 
will it not be reasonable to study the influences 
of the various energies issued from the solar 
globe and from the other globes dependent upon 
the Sun for their supply of all vital energies and 
reflected by them under various modifications 
Astrology is a science which deals with Time 



2 


MUHURTHA 


proceeding from the Sun and all the wonderful 
phenomena which are embodied in that mysteri- 
ous agency. Scientific investigations have now' 
led to fclio conclusion that we arc faced with a 
cosmic determinism. Astrology is a complete 
system of philosophy that requires the assistance 
of neither metaphysics nor Physics. It is the 
empirical systematisation of the idea that 
Radiation is the determinant of all terrestrial 
phenomena. That idea is as valid today as when 
it was first started and the most striking experi- 
mental evidence of its validity lias been furnished 
by modem scientific research. .Being* the first 
.human attempt to apply mathematics fo biology 
its conclusions and broad generalisations are 
being con firmed by newer scientific data. 

As to how planets influence human beings, 
we do not propose to answer in these pages. This 
particulai^subject has been dealt with i*n detail 
in AnTntroduction to Study of Astrology" 
by Prof. B.' Suryanarain Row and in out 
Astrology and Modern Thought to which 
the reader may conveniently refer if he is still 
doubtful about the rationale of astrology. Suffice 
to say that we are living in a veritable sea of 
vibratory energies which unerringly and equitab- 
ly supply the -means of creating, maintaining and 



VALUE OPiTlME 


3 


destroying life arid its activities' in our little 
Universe. Planetary rays -ate unseen, vibrations 
and they affect biological and .psychological 
processes. . ' 

If wo admit: that: tho Sun is the source of all 
life and its activities then itfollows that in Time 
— rrwhioh is denoted by the Sun — is embedded all 
forces oi 1 * energies for the works of creation, 
protection and -destruction and these energies 
have been very, carefully unearthed by the 
ancient Maliarsliios and embodied into - the 
formulae.*' found so- profusely- in the pages of 
Muluu;tha, an (important division of astrology. 
Time is the essence of all things — their creator, 
protector and destroyer. The seasons of natural 
law into which the common year is divided 
liave their counterparts in the precessional cycle 
of the Sun. Periods, of planting, cultivation, 
harvest, maturity and decay are common to every 
sub-cycle of its activity. Time has got its own 
properties. The first substance of Time is of 
course energy generated by sidereal activity. 
Its forms are active when phenomenal and 
potential when non-phenoraenal.’ Time therefore 
can be said to be the basic working power in 
/tstivicgj-. This is espeeiziiy so in Mahavtlm 
as. within the time, chosen for< a particular 



MUHURTHA 


purpose all tlie good vibrations have to bo 
centered such that the energy generated would 
nullify all other unfavourable factors and ensure 
success of the enterprise. 

"What is meant by Muhurtha ? How far is it 
superior to horoseopy ? These are important 
questions which we shall try to answer rather 
elaborately. Horoseopy reads' wliat is indicated 
by the planetary positions at the time of birth 
being the resultant of one’s previous karma. In 
other words, it has to do only with what one 
has brought with him — the sum-total of one’s 
inheritance — physical, mental and material. Here 
we do nothing more than read simply a technical 
letter as if it were written in planetary and 
other symbols. Muhurtha on the other hand is 
much more important. It gives valuable direc- 
tions by following which the person will bo 
enabled to remove,* neutralise, counteract or 
altogether overcome the evils indicated by the 
horoscopio ohart. Horoseopy is diagnostic. It 
merely points ' out the ills but prescribes no 
remedies. Muhurtha. is prescriptive as well as 
preventive. It tells how by undertaking ventures 
at auspicious times one can "ward off the evils 
and'ensure success. Suppose broken education 
is indicated by the position of evil planets in the 


SCOPE OF MUHURTHA 


5 


fourth house from the ascendant and the afflic- 
tion of Jupiter, lord of education and Mercury 
lord of intelligence. These .planetary conjunc- 
tions indicate want of education in a man as a 
result of his karma in previous states^ of exis- 
tence. Muliurtha says that the obstructions to 
educational progress by the planetary conjuctions 
indicated at the time of birth can be minimised 
by fixing an auspicious .time for commencing 
the education. Suppose evil planets in the 
fifth bouse indicate loss of children. Then 
Muhurtha comes to bis help first by asking him 
to many at a certain auspicious time when 
ethereal currents released • from the planets will 
bo so powerful as to minimise or modify, the 
afflictions to the extent that the birth and 
survival of at least some children may be ensured. 
Thus Muhurtha helps one to minimise or modify 
the evils of our past karma to' a considerable 
extent. I must warn my readers not to imagine 
that Muhurtha is the Master-key to all wealth 
and happiness. Muhurtha tells us when to do 
a certain thing if failure is to be avoided. 

We have Baid above that creative, protective 
aciu tfesZnxutrve Zanies are embedded in the 
womb of Time. As the Sun and the planets 
are the signatures of Time and as all the forces 



c 


OfOHURTHA 


or energies liare their source of 1 mi gin in the Sun, 
the movements of planets give us a clue as to 
■when the various kinds of creative and destnic- 
tive forces which are inofching but ladiations 
set in. ; 

Taking an everyday example, nobody could 
say that the influence of the Sun dining thd 
course of one daj wil) be tlic same. The Sun 
in the morning, the Sun in ' the ‘afteinooh, the 
Sun in the evening and \tlie' Siui at midnight 
cannot and will not he the same ill heat or 'in 
any of his other agencies^ lfglit/ nidghetisih, 
electricity, etc^ A man wants’ to 'haVe a picnic 
and we ask 'him to have it either in the morning 
pr in the evening when fche‘J>un is n6't veiy hot. 
This will be asking lnm l 't<l i eject ihe noon a& 
inauspicious for plcasuie. Heie f the physical 
effects aie demonstrable (o'^ome J extent. Simi- 
larly a man wants to have a " ' pleasant function! 
We advise him to have it at a suitable time when^ 
in spite of the season* being 'Vainy, ’theie is nd 
chance of the weather 1 'being cloudy or'iairiyi 
Will we be wiong In asking 1 liiin ' to ‘ reject the 
time when the> weather is likely to 'be' disturbed ? 
The same reasoning should guide us to appreciate 
the idea behind ‘the* sdlecti'on .of .auspicious 
times for’ Orif various (activities*-'! There is a! time 



( OBSTRUCTIVE VIBRATIONS 


to sow and a time to reap. Why mot we do the 
sowing operations during harvest season ? Nature 
would be against us. This is shown by tho 
Sun’s position. During the sowing season, 
creative forces are in operation. When an 
important activity is 4 to be undertaken, destruc- 
tive forces have to be screened off. All the 
planets move incessantly and release different 
kinds of forces and tho Maharshies have given 
ns clues as to how best we can make use of the 
grand constructive vibrations operating in nature 
if our' endeavours arc to be endowed with 
success. 

Even animals instinctively feel that they 
should move in harmony with nature. For 
instance, the palolo .worm found in the sea 
around the Fiji Islands reacts in a very definite 
way to lunar and solar cycles. This animal 
Jives the greater part of its life .in deep coral 
rock's beneath the sea. Towards November, 
the hind portion of the body becomes distended 
with migrate eggs. In the early morning, 
exactly one week after the full moon in November, 
the hind portion detaches itself as a special 
reproductive individual which comes to the 
surface, discharges its eggs in an explosive 
manner and then dies. There is therefore some 



8 


MUHURTHA 


sort of an instinctive appreciation on tlie part of 
the worm of the Moon’s influences, and that the 
eggs should be discharged only when the plane- 
tary-vibrations are harmoniously disposed. When 
such is the case, a human being is to be much 
more conscious about forces, that make or mar 
his progress and how by the selection of a proper 
moment, he could take advantage of the cons- 
tructive forces operating in nature. 

Each moment has got its own potency and 
as Carl Jung says “whatever is born or done this 
moment of time has the qualities of this moment 
of time”. Hence the moment of birth or the 
moment at which we elect to do an important 
aot is not certainly an insignificant epoch. 
Cosmic radiations pouring at the moment on the 
earth from outer space and coming from various 
stars and planets act on our brain cells which 
take up.these cosmio radiations which are trans- 
formed into vital electricity. It must be noted 
that in all undertakings invisible energies are 
set in motion by our words, deeds, thoughts and 
of course by our actions. You may call these 
invisible forces as electric, ethereal or electro- 
magnetic or cosmic radiations. As Man himself 
is an electrical body discharging different kinds 
of electrical energies, his success and failure 



MUHURTHA. DEFINED 


9 


are simply matters of attraction and repulsion 
between himself and the objects with which he 
has to deal in his day-to-day activities. 

Muhurtha could therefore he defined as that 
precious moment when the vibrations discharged 
bj’ man are altered to a specific wave-length 
capable of entering resonance with radiations of 
the same vibratory rate coming from other 
planets and stars. 


CHAPTER II 
GENERAL HINTS 

‘ A very important place is assigned by 
Hindu Astrology to the part played by the Moon 
in the fixing of propitious times. The Moon 
rules the mind and all our psychological inhibi- 
tions and his position in- the election chart is to 
be particularly dignified. Moreover, whenever an 
election is to be made, it should always bear a 
sympathetic connection with the birth chart. 
Should the radical horoscope indicate 4 several 
afflictions, no muhurtha can ensure real success. 
In fact, the strength of the birth chart 
may even prevent the person from taking 
advantage of the propitious period. Or. at 
best, the chances of failure may be somewhat 



10 


MUHURIHA 


minimised. There is therefore an important 
‘factor to be considered, viz., whether the 
birth chart Is really so powerfully afflicted 
as to offset the chances of success shown in the 
election chart. When people do not know the 
birth chart, the best thing would be to ascertain 
their name constellation (see appendix at the 
end of the book) and study the transit influences 
operating at the period in question. Whether 
or not the radical chart is strong, Hindu astro- 
logy always takes cognisance' of the fact that 
contact is maintained between the Janma Tara 
(the Constellational'positidh’of the Moon at one’s 
birth) and if the birth tune is not known, - with 
the Nama-Tara (name-constellation), and the 
election chart. 

Whilst it is necessary to bear in mind that 
the election chart is likely to be affected by the 
benofio or malefic nature of the directions oper- 
ating at the moment in the birth chart and the 
inherent strength of the horoscope, it is not 
necessary to go into it in detail. A number of 
combinations is given in ancient works to so 
strengthen the election chart as to make it 
fruitful independent of the birth influences. 
These details will be discussed in their appro- 
priate places. ' ' ' 



THITin DEFINED 


11 


Before we take up elect-ici tal astrology, 
proper, a short description of the Panehang or’ 
Indian almanac is very necessary, as the impor- 
tant items constituting a Panehang have an 
intimate bearing on the fixing of auspicious 
-times. The Panclianga consists of five limbs or 
■accessories, viz., Thithi (lunar day), Vara (week 
day), Nakshafcra (constellation), Yoga (a Iuni- 
-Solar day) fin'd Karana (half a lunar day). The* 
reader will ha^e to be familiar with these techni- 
calities though by far the most important 
ones are the lunar day, constellation and week 
day. Tlie -five limbs of the Panclianga are 
supposed to represent the five sources of ethereal 
energy of which some are visible • find others 
invisible and which when properly' secured will 
-conduce to the health, wealth and prosperity of 
mankind. 

Thithi TJiis is the ,|imo during which the 
•difference of the increment of longitude of the 
Sun and the Moon amounts to 13° - The' lunar 
day is to the. Hindu of the. most, prominent 
practical importance, since, by it. ary regulated, 
the performance of many religious ceremonies 
iind upon it depend -the chief Considerations of 
Muhurtha or electional astrology < I In other 
words fche.tliithi represents the lunar energy and 



12 


MUHURTHA 


lunar, energy is identified with mental energy. 
Therefore a minute knowledge of the lunar move- 
ments constituting thitliies is said to give us- 
wealth. 

Yara s— This is of course the ordinary week 
day. Tlie’weok days are named in accordance 
with certain astronomical' considerations. There- 
fore on a week day hearing the name d/ a parti- 
cular planet, the influence of that planet is said 
to be predominent. 

Nakahatra s— The zodiac is marked by 27 
constellations or nakslmtras often termed lunar* 
mansions. » The position of a naksliatra is- 
dependent upon fcbe actual time taken by the 
Moon to traverse 13° 20' of ecliptic arc, of course, 
always beginning from the first point of the 
constellational zodiac. If constellations are 
huge electro-magnetic bodies radiating energy 
into space, there seems to be sense in attributing 
certain influences to these radiations and' the 
Moon coming into contact with such radiations - 
probably exercises special influences. 

Yoga It is the period during which the joint- 
motion in longitude of the Sun and the Moon 
amounts to 13° 20'. Every Hindu almanac con— 



VARIETIES OF KARANA 13 

-tains a column specifying the yoga for each day 
rand when it would end. There are twenty-seven 
yogas, viz. 

(1) Vishkambha, (2) Preeti, (3) Ayusliman, 
(4) Sowbliagya, (5) Soblmna, (6) Atiganda, 

(7) Sulrarma, (8) Dhriti, (9) Soola, (10) Ganda, 
(11) Yriddlii, (12) Dkruva, (13) Yyaghata, 
-(14) Harsliana, (15) Vajra, (16) Siddhi, 
(17) Vyatipata, (18) Yariyan, (19) Parigha, 
(20) Siva, (21) Siddha, (22) Sadbya, (23) Subha, 
(24) SuMa, (25) Brahma, (20) India and 
(27) Vydhruti. 

Yoga represents a conjunction of subtle 
influences which strengthen our bodjes, remove 
the germs of disease, and help us to enjoy health 
and life in its various phases. 

Karana And finally we have karana, or half a 
lunar day meaning thereby the time taken to com- 
plete the distance which should be the multiple of 
G° between the Sun and Moon. There are 11 
karanas, viz., (1) Bava, (2) Balava, (3) Kaulava, 
(4) Taitula, (5) Garija, (0) Vanija, (7) Visti, 

(8) Sakuna, (9) Chatuspada, (10) Naga and 
(11) Kimstnghna. The first seven come by 
rotation eight times in a lunar month, commen- 
cing with the second half of the first lunar day_ 



14 


MBHURTHA » 


The last four are said to be permanent karanas- 
and ocour in order with the second half of the- 
29th lunar day. 

In Muhurtha, it is always advisable to 
strengthen the ascendant and its lord and the 
Moon. Eaoh type of election requires fortifi- 
cation of some appropriate house and planet and. 
these will be discussed in their proper places. 
Even when 'the ascendant is strong, certain 
parts of it which go under the name of Lagna 
thyajya should be rejected. • Sometimes, '"only 
fixed signs arc to be ohosen ; sometimes only 
niov’able # signs are to be chosen. Hence a reader 
has' to very carefully understand these ..subtle 
distinctions. 

In Aries, Taurus, Sagittarius and Virgo, the 
first half .gfiati (12 "minutes) should be avoided 
as it is supposed to be in;the nature of a serpent 
(bhujanga) and hence destructive. In regard 'to 
"Pisces, Capricorn,’ Cancer and Scorpio the last 
half gliati (12 minutes) has to be avoided as it 
is supposed to be presided over by the evil force 
of Raha. The middle half ghafci should be 
rejected with regard to Gemini,' Libra, Leo and 
Aquarius as it is ruled by an evil force termed 
.Gridhra. 

' Tuesday and Saturday should be invariably 



NEGATIVE 'PERIODS 


lb- 


avoided for all good and auspioious work. 

The 4th, 8tli, 12th and 14th lunar days both 
in the bright and the dark half are unsuitable 
for undertaking anj’ auspicious work. 

Each constellation has its own thyajya kala 
or negative period which is to be invariably 
avoided. . The negative periods commence at 
the times marked against each constellation 
lasting for 4 ghaties from thence. 

, Aswini 50; Bharani 4; Krittika 30; Rohini 
40; Mrigasira 14; Aridra 21 ; Pimar vasu' 30; 
Pushya20; Aslesha3*2; Makha30; Pubba 20; 
Uttara 1; Hasta 21; Cliitta 20; Swati 14; 
Visaklia 14 ; Anuradha 10 ; Jj-eshta 14 ; Hoola 20; 
Purvashadlia 20 ; Uttarasliadha 20 ; Sravaua*10 ; 
Dhanishta 10; Satabliisha 18 ; Purvabhadra 10; 
UttavabluuTra and Revati 30. 

In the scheme that is followed, I have first 
<of all dealt with the pre-natal and post-natal 
ceremonies which -arc designated as Shodasa 
Karinas which every Hindu is supposed to under- 
go in his life's journey from cradle to the grave 
Some of these ceremonies such as baptising, 
first feeding, marriage etc., are common to all 
communities so that non-Hindus fan make use 
of them with equal benefit. 

The Shodasa Karinas (sixteen kinds of cere- 



10 


MUHURTHA 


monies) which a Hindu is enjoined to undergo 
seem to have been based upon certain critical 
psychological and physiological developments 
(climacteries) which occur in a man’s life at 
certain definite intervals. It must be noted 
that the successive stage when the human infant 
assumes the upright posture, commences to 
speak and so on, occur at fixed times in normal 
development so much so that a child that does 
not begin to talk or walk at the proper time 
becomes a source of anxiety to his parents. The 
change of teeth also marks a transition. Per- 
manent dentition sets in about 7 years after 
birth. Seven years after this another crisis is 
reached and that is puberty. A further change 
is noted about the age of 21. There are of course 
several other critical periods such as- the meno- 
pause occurring at the age of 49 or 50 (7 x 7), 
another grand climacteric at 03 (7 x 9) often 
accompained by death. In the human being, 
it is said that every cell of the body is renewed 
every seven years, although this is not quite 
correct for all tissues. Thus Shodasa Karmas 
are supposed to fortify the human body and 
human mind at such critical phases. Perhaps 
a deeper study of the problem will reveal a more 
correct perspective of the rationale. 



CHAPTER III 


THE BIRTH STAR AND THE BIRTH MOON 

In fixing auspicious times, apart from the 
■special planetary combinations to be applied for 
specific purposes, there are three factors which 
are common to almost all elections and which 
require the astrologer’s most careful attention. 
They are , (a) Tarabala or strength .of constel- 
lation, (b) Chandrabala or Lunar strength and 
(c) Panchaka or five-source energy. These three 
should, be satisfactorily disposed. Otherwise 
an election chart will lose its significance. 

Strength of Constellation T h e constellation 
rnling at the time of birth is one’s Janmanak- 
shatra or Birth star and the zodiacal sign in 
which the Moon is situated at the time of one’s 
birth is one’s Janma Rasi or Birth Moon. These 
are highly important. Count from the birth 
constellation to the one ruling on the particular 
day on which a new work is to be done or a 
journey undertaken and divide the number by 0 
if divisible. Otherwise keep it as it is. If the 
remainder is 1 (Janma) it indicates danger to 
body ; if 2 (sampat) wealth and prosperity ; if 3 
(vipat) dangers, losses and accidents; if 4 
(kshema) prosperity ; if 5 (pratyak) obstacles ; 

2 



18 


MUIIURTHA 


if 0 (sadhana) realisation of ambitions; if 7 
(naidhana) dangers ; if 8 (mitra) good find if 9 
(parama mitra) very favourable. There are 
certain exceptions to the favourable and un- 
favourable results ascribed above and they will 
be dealt with in the appropriate places. 

Example:— A man born in Aswini elects to 
undertake a journey on a day ruled by Sravana. 
_ Counting from the man’s Janma Nakshatra to 
the one ruling on the proposed day, the number 
null be 22. This divided by 0 leaves a remainder 
( of 4. This goes under kshema or favourable and 
lienee Tarabala is good. 

Chandrabala:— As we have already said above, 
the consideration of the Moon and bis position 
are of much importance in Muhurthar To be at 
its - best, the Moon should not occupy in the 
eleotion chart, a position that happens to repres- 
ent the Gth, 8th or 12th .from the person's Janma 
Basi. 

To take another example, a person horn in 
Mrigasira (Janma Basi being Taurus) wants to 
have his marriage on a day ruled by Bharani 
which means the Moon will be in Mesha. There 
is neither Tarabala ^as Bharani will be naidhana 
to Mrigasira) nor Chandrabala (the Moon on the 



PANCHAKA 


19 


election day falls in Aries whioh would be the 
12th from the subject’s Janma Rasi). Hence, 
the day is most inauspicious. Certain constel- 
lations, apart from their being harmonious or 
otherwise disposed with reference to one’s own 
Janma Nakslratra should be invariably avoided 
for certain specific purposes on account of their 
Inherent evil natures. In fact, Bharani is con- 
demned for all good work and it has to be 
scrupulously avoided for all good work. 

Panchaka ( Five Source Energy ) ; — For matters* 
of ordinary importance such as interviewing 
superiors or going on short journeys, a favour- 
able Tarabala will do and there is no 
need to consider the panchaka. But in regard 
to very important ceremonies’ such as marriage, 
nuptials, entry into new houses etc., this should 
be carefully looked into. There are several 
methods by which Panchaka is determined. I 
shall give the most common method. In the 
Panchaka determination, apparently, five sources 
of planetary, stellar and zodiacal energies are 
involved. Take the number of the lunar day 
(from the 1st of the mouth), the number of the 
week day, (Sunday 1, etc.) the number of 1 the 
constellation (from Aswini) and the number of the 
lagna (from Aries). Add these together and divide 



20 


MUHURTHA 


tlie total by 9. If the remainder is 1 (mrityu) it 
indicates danger; if 2 (agnipanchakam) risk from 
fire ; if 4 ( Raja panehakam ) bad results ; if 0 
(chora panehakam ) evil happenings and if 8 (roga 
panehakam) disease. If the remainder is 3, 5, 7 
or 0, then it is good. As an example, let us 
assume that A wants to start a business on a 
day and time otherwise conforming to the 
requirement of Muhurtha — the constellation 
being Aslesha, the ‘lunar day being the 13th, 
the rising sign being Virgo and the week day 
Sunday. Calculating the panoliaka, we get 
Number of the lunar day 13 

Number of constellation 9 - 

Number of week day 1 

Number or zodiacal sign 6 

' 29 

Dividing this by 9, we get 29/9=31/— 2 as remain- 
der. It indicates Vahni or fire and hence the 
time selected is not favourable. In dealing with 
this subject, Pi-of. Rao observes thus in his 
famous book astrological mirror — “ There are 
veiy many things as in medicine, so in Astrology 
which when properly undei-stood and followed 
would tend to minimise the chances of evil 
influences indicated by planets, lunar days, 
constellations and rising signs and in all these 


RAJA, AGNI AND CHORA PANCHAKA 21 

the idea seems to be to avert the evils which 
would arise as a matter of fact from the attrac- 
tion or combination of the subtle influences 
contained in Time, and the chemical changes 
which arise from the conjunctions and repulsions 
of various forms of energies, some of which are 
visible, while many of which are subtle aud very 
mysterious in their .nature 

The general rule of avoiding unfavourable 
panchaka has certain exceptions. When an 
election is to do with occupation, avoid Baja 
panchaka. In elections bearing on housebuilding, 
avoid both Raja and Agni panchaka. In regard 
to travel, Chora panchaka should be rejected. 
In marriage and Upanayanam, Rog a and Mritya 
panchka should be avoided. Conversely it also 
means that a panchaka declared unsuitable for 
a particular type of election could be used for a 
different kind of election, No astrological 
authority has specifically approved , this step but 
by implication, we can assume that there is no 
objection if for instance we ignore Raja panchaka 
for travelling >01' marriage or Roga panckakam 
for house-building. 1 As far -as possible, it is 
. advisable, to avoid the- .evil of panchaka .-in 
general irrespective of its definite. .bearing on ,an ' 
election. But when a more auspicious . day. 



22 


MUHURTHA 


cannofc be secured, we can resort to the lesser of 
the two evils. 

As regards Tarabala referred to above, it is 
no doubt advisable to avoid a day that is ruled 
by the 1st, 3rd, 5tli and 7th constellations. But 
when the day is otherwise favourable, onty the 
negative parts of these unfavourable constella- 
tions may be avoided. Thus in the Janma, 
Yipat, Pratyak and Naidliana constellations, the 
first, 7, 3 and 8 ghaties respectively may be consi- 
dered evil and avoided. Thus a man whose Janma 
Nakshatra fe Pushyami can undertake a venture 
on a day ruled by Maklia (vipat) provided he avoids 
the first seven ghaties of the constellation. The 
stigma attached to the star being vipat no longer 
holds good. Generally these exceptions are 
resorted to only under special circumstances 
when an election is to be urgently made and 
when the undertaking admits of no delay. 

A day ruled by' one’s Janma Nakshatra is 
ordinarily held to be unfavourable for an election. 
But in regard to nuptials, sacrifices, first 
feeding, agriculture, upanayanam, coronation, 
buying lands, learning the alphabet, Janma 
Nakshatra is favourable without exception. But 
it is inauspicious for war, sexual union, shaving, 
taking medical treatment, travel and marriage. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 


*23 


For a woman, Janma Nakshatra would be quite 
favourable for marriage. 

There are several technicalities to be consi- 
dered in the selection of auspicious times and 
in spite of the apparent inconsistencies to be 
found in the opinions expressed by different 
classical writers on this subject, I have en- 
deavoured to give the easiest and what in my 
humble opinion are the most reliable principles 
bearing on this all-important ^subject. 


CHAPTER IV 

INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 

The whole of Muhurtha or for that matter, 
the whole of Hindu asfcrplogy- is based on the 
movements of planets in relation to the constel- 
lations. The wisdom of’ the ancient Indians in 
making predictive astrology dependent upon the 
fixed zodiac, is being increasingly appreciated by 
students of the science. The question of zodiacal 
influences hinges on the fact whether the star- 
points or constellations with which the Sun 
comes into line from day to day derive their influ- 
ences from that body or irrespective of the shifting 
position of the Sun, there is any special virtue 



24 


MUHURTHA 


attaching to these star points. We have shown 
with incontrovertible evidence in several of our 
articles that the stars have a decided influence 
on all human affairs and we have several times 
disproved the absurd views displayed by the 
so-called scientists that because stars are re- 
moved millions and billions of miles from us, 
there cannot be any connection between those- 
gigantic masses and the living human beings. 

. These electro-magnetic bodies are capable of 
discharging different kinds of energies manifest- 
ing themselves in different ways. When a con- . 
stellation like Bharani (Aries) is held to be 
constitutionally unfit for certain types of elec- 
tions it means that the vibrations they send are 
destructive in character. 

I do not propose to discuss here the astro- ' 
logical influences of the various constellations 
elaborately. I would give just the important* 
ones, mainly bated on brihat samhita and leave 
the reader, to refer to more standard works on 
Muhurtlia for further details. 

* The 28 constellations (including Abhijit? 
which is generally ignored in everyday astrologi- 
cal consultations) are presided over by Aswins, 
Yama, Agni, Prajapati,- the Moon, JRudra, Aditi, 
Jupiter, Serpent, Pitrus or manes, Bhaga, 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 


25 


Alyaman, Savita, Swashta, Yayu, Indragni,. 
Mifcra, India, Niruti, Yisvedewa, Brahman r 
Yislinu, Yasu, Yanina, Ajaikapat, Ahibudhya 
and Puslian respectively. 

Rohini, Uttara, -Uttamsliadka and Ufctara- 
bhadra are supposed to be fixed constellations 
and they are favourable' for coronations, laying" 
the foundation of cities, sowing operations,, 
planting trees and other permanent things. 

Chitra, Anuradlia, Mrigasira and Revati are 
soft constellations. They are good for wearing 
new apparel, learning dancing, music and fine 
arts, sexual'u nion and performance of auspicious- 
ceremonies. 

Aswini, Pushy a, Hasta and Abliijit are, 
Might' constellations, and they can be selected 
for putting ornamentation, pleasures and sports r 
administering medicine, starting industries and 
undertaking travels. 

Mala, Jyeshta, Aridra and Aslesba are 
* sharp ' in nature and they are favourable for 
incantations, invoking spirits, for imprisonment,, 
murders, and separation of’ friends. 

Sravana, Dkanislita, Satabhisha» Punarvasu 
and Swati are movable stars and they are 



2G 


MUHURTHA 


Auspicious for acquiring vehicles, for gardening 
iind for going on. procession. 

Pubba, Purvasliadha and Purvabhadra, 
Bliarani and Makha are dreadful stars and they 
Are suitable for nefarious schemes, poisoning, 
deceit, imprisonment, setting fire and other evil 
deeds. 

Krittika and Visakha arc ‘ mixed ’ constel- 
lations and during their influence, works of day 
to day. importance can he undertaken. 

Beginning from the third quarter of Dhani- 
•shta and ending with the last part of Revati, 
the time is held to be highly unsuitable for any 
kind of auspicious work. This period goes 
under the special name of Nakshatra Panchaka 
.and when these stars are ruling, one should 
definitely avoid journey towards the South, 
house repairing or renovation, collecting fuel 
And cattle fodder, or acquiring cots and beds. 

Of all the twenty-eight constellations, the 
pride of place is invariably given to Pushya the 
■8th star. 

. The constellation of Pushya is supposed to 
be the most favourable of all the 28 constel- 
lations and neutralises almost all doslias or flaws 



YOGAS AND THEIR NEUTRALISATION 


27 


arising out of a number of adverse combinations. 
The Rishis go to tlio extent of saying that even 
if unfavourable combinations are present in the 
birth horoscope hampering one’s success in life, 
and the ruling constellation and the position of 
the Moon arc all adverse, Pushyami has tlio 
power of neutralising these evil forces and 
asserting its benefic nature. In spite of all the 
benefic influences attributed to Pushya, it is 
held to be inauspicious for purposes of marriage. 
There may be an clement of exaggeration in the 
assertion that Pushyami is capable of modifying 
all the evil influences present in an election 
chart but there is no doubt whatsoever that it 
is a constellation par excellence that could be 
universally employed for all purposes, excepting 
of course marriage. 


, CHAPTER V 

SPECIAL ADVERSE YOGAS AND THEIR NEUTRALISATION 

Tbe framers of tlie astrological rules were 
not mere theorists. They were practical men and 
•did not believe in merely cataloguing their 
observations' for academical purposes. "Whilst it 
is always desirable to fix a muhurtha that is 



28 


MUHUKTHA 


auspicious bj' all standards of astrological rules,, 
there would sometimes be practical difficulties 
and emergent occasions which admit of no 
delay. Therefore, emphasis is laid on what is 
‘called gunabahulya or excess of good and dosha 
swalpa or deficiency of evil. When one has to visit 
a friend or a relation, who is seriously ill in a far 
off place, wo are asked not to attach any 
consideration to the astrological factors. Because 
at a moment's notice it is impossible to get a 
time which could be deemed to be propitious 
astrologically. iBut when one is to go on a 
pilgrimage or a business tour or for a marriage, 
one should see that be starts under influences 
that are harmoniously disposed towards him. 

There are said to be 21 great evils (Ekavim- 
sati Mahadoshas) which are to be avoided for 
any auspicious work. But when one finds it 
difficult to avoid tliein because of astronomical 
impossibility or circumstantial inability, one can 
take advantage of the neutralising combinations 
Which are generally supposed 'to ‘act as antidotes. 
We may. just make a passing reference to these 
21 great evils for the information of the readers.. 
They are : — . . . f . 

1 . P&ichauga. SuddhU— We have already said 
that, a Panchanga consists.. of, thithi, vara r 



.PANCHANGA SGDDHI 


29 


nakshatra, yoga and karana. All these must be 
auspicious. In regal'd to lunar days, the 4th, 6th 
•8th, I2tli and 14tli, full and new moon -days 
should he avoided. In regard to Vara, Thursday 
and Friday are held to be suitable for all work. 
-Tuesday is to be generally avoided except when 
it happens to be the 10th, 12th or 16th day of. 
the child’s birth when the child’s Namakarana 
^baptising or giving name) may he performed. Of 
the several Nakshatras, Bharani and Krittika 
should be invariably avoided for all auspicious 
work as these two are said to be presided 
over by the god of death (Yama) and the god 
of fire (Agni) respectively. The last parts of 
Aslesha, Jyeshta and Rcvati should also be 
avoided. Coming to the Yoga ( vide page 12 ) 
the 16th (Atiganda) the 9tli (sula) 10th (Ganda) 
17th (Vyafchipatha) and 27th (Vaidhruti) have 
deleterious effects upon events which are started 
or connnenced under them. The Karana chosen 
must be appropriate to the election in view. 
Thus Bava is auspicious for starting works of 
permanent importance while Thaithula is propi- 
tious for marriage. Bhadra is unfit for any good 
work but is eminently suitable for violent and 
cruel deeds. For getting mantras Sakini 
Karana is propitious. 



30 


MUIIURTHA 


Therefore Panchanga Suddhi means a good 
lunar day, a beneficial week day, an auspicious^ 
constellation, a good yoga and a fertilising 
Karana. 

2. Surya Sankramana s— 1 The 2nd great evil is 
Surya Sankramana or the solar ingress into 
different zodiacal signs. "When the Sun is about 
to leave one Rasi and enters another there 
seem to occur certain disturbances in the 
organisation of the solar forces and such times 
are not recommended for any good work. On the , 
contrary, they are held to be propitious for 
meditation, initiations into secret mantras and 
performance of certain religions rites which are 
held to purify not only the bodily electrical 
discharges but also the mental currents. Sixteen 
ghaties (Glirs. 24 min.), both before and after 
the entry of Sun into a new sign should be 
rejected for all new works. 

3. Karthari Dosha:— Karthari means scissors. 
In an election, when two evil planets are placed 
on either side of the lagna, the combination goes 
under the special name of Karthari Dosha and it 
should be rejected for all good work particularly 
in regard to marriage. 

4. Shashtashta Yiphagatha Chandra Dosha: — The 
Moon should invariably be avoided in the 6th, 



Dl'RMUHURTHA 


31 


8th and 12th houses from the lagna rising in an 
election chart. 

i 

o. Sagraha Chandra Dosha The Moon’s asso- 
ciation with any other planet, benefic ormalefic& 
should be definitely avoided. This injunction is 
specially applicable in chso of marriage. 

6. Udayastha Snddhi 1 The lagna and the 
seventh should he strong. The lagna should bo 
occupied by its own lord and the navamsa lagna 
by its own lord or vice versa or lord of lagna should 
aspect Navamsa lagna and vice versa. Similarly 
the 'seventh and the lord of the seventh 
bliava should be favourably disposed. The 
strength of lagna and the 7th is necessary in all 
elections but especially in regard to marriage. 

7 . Durnrahurtha M ulmrtha technically 
means 48 minutes or* 2 gbatis in terms of Time. 
A sidereal day consists of 30 muhurthas. The 1st 
fifteen, diurnal muhurthas named are (1) Rudra, 

(2) Alii, (3) Mitra, (4) Pitm, (5) Vasu, *(G) Yam, 
(7) Yishwedcva, (8) Yidhi,* (9) Sathainukhi, 
(10) Puruhuta, (11) Tallin, (12) Naktanchara, (13) 
Yaruna, (14) Aiama and (15) Bhaga. The noctur- 
nal muhurthas are: — -(1) vGirisa, (2) Ajipada, 

(3) Ahirbudhnya, (4) Pusha, (o) Aswi, (G) Yam a. 



32 


MUHURTHA 


<7) Agni, (8) Vidhatru, (9) Chanda, (10) Aditi, 
■*> (W Jeeva, (12) Yishnu, (13) Yumigadyuti, (14) 
Thyastliur and (15) Samdram. 
v 

In regard to the diurnal muhurthas the 1st, 
2nd, 4th, 10th, 11th, 12th and 15th are inauspi- 
cious while in nocturnal muhurthas 1st, 2nd, 6th 
and 7th are inauspicious. 

In calculating the muhurtlia, the exaot 
length of day and night should be ascertained. 
Each rauhurtha is said to last for 48 minutes 
(2 ghaties) on the assumption that the duration 
of day and night is of equal proportion, vim., 80 
ghaties. If the length of day is 28 ghaties, then 
each muhurtha extends for 1 ghati and 52 
vighaties." 

Apart from the above general classification 
of good and- bad muhurthas, the followingshould 
also be deemed as unpropitious on the different 
week days. Sunday the 14th (argama); Monday 
the 8th (vidhi) and the 12th (Nakthanchara) ; 
Tuesday the 4th (Pitru) and the 11th 
(vahin) ; "Wednesday, abhigit ; Thursday the 
'12th (Nakthanchara) and 13th (Yaruna); 
Friday the 4th (Pitru) and the 8th (vidhi) and 
Saturday the 1st (Rudra) and the 2nd ( Ahi ). 



KUJASHTAMA 


33 


Particularly in marriages, the muhurthas 
declared above as inauspicious in regard to N week 
days should be scrupulously rejected. 

8. Gandanthara -.—The last 2 gbaties of die 
5th, 10th and 15th (Full Moon) and the first 2 
gbaties of the 6th, llfch .and the 1st (dark half) 
lunar days go under the Thithi gandanthara and 
they should bo rejected for all new works. 
Similarly the last 2 degrees of Cancer, Scorpio 
and Pisces and the first 2 degrees of Leo, 
Sagittarius and Aries are inauspicious. The last 
gbaties of Asleslia, Jyeshta, Moola, Revati and 
Aswini and the first four gliaties of Makba 
should he avoided as injurious for good work. 

9. Papaahadvarga : — Malefics should not be 
strong in shodvargas in an election chart. 

10. Bhrigu Sliatka The position of Venus 
in the Otli is highly injurious. This is especially 
so in regard to marriage. Even when Venus is 
exalted and associated with benefics, suob a 
disposition should be avoided. 

11. Knjashtaraa Mars should invariably he 
avoided in the 8th house, as it ifufieatesjdestruc- 
tion of the object in view, In a marriage^ 
election chart, Mars in the 8th is unthinkable. 

3 



84 


MUHURTHA 


Even if Mai's is otherwise powerful, he should 
not occupy the 8th house. 

12- Ashtama Lagna Dosha In selecting a. 
time for marriage, the lagna ascending should 
not happen to be the 8tli from the Jnnma Lagna 
of the bride and the bridegroom. Suppose the 
would-be husband and wife are bom in Kumbha 
and Makara respectively. At the time of 
inarriage, the ascending lagna should be a sign 
other than Virgo or Leo as these two happen to 
be the 8th from the bridegroom and bride's 
Janiim Lagna respectively. 

13. RasI Yisha Ghatika:— Elsewhere has been 
given the negative periods of different Iagnas 
(Lagna Thyajya). They are to be rejected for 
all auspicious work. 

14. Kunayamsa Dosha: — The lagna selected 
f<j>r an auspicious work should not occupy the 
navamsa of a malefic. 

i 15. Yaradosha This has already been 
explained on page 14. Certain week days are to 
be avoided for certain •special activities. 

’ 1G. Grahanothpatlia Dosha : — T h e constella- 

tions in which- the eclipses appear should be 
avoided, and in regard to marriage, such a 
constellation should be avoided for six months. 


IMPORTANT 'EVILS’ 


35 


17. Ekargala Dosha This dosha is powerful 
only during the day time. Affects matters 
started under certain yogas such as Yishhambam. 
We need not go into details as it is not of much 
significance. 

18. Krarasamyuta Dosha: — The constellation 
occupied by the Sun at a given moment, and 
the one immediately preceding and succeeding 
it have to be deemed unpropitious for all good 
work and they should be rejected for purposes 
of marriage. 

19. Akalagarjitha Yrishti Dosha When there 
Is rainfall and thunder, out of season, such days 
should be deemed unfit for all good work. 

'20. Mahapatha Dosha:— When the Sun and 
the Moon are equally removed from thg equator 
upon the. same side of it, the aspect is known as 
•Yyafcipata, which indicates excess of evil. This is 
held to be unfavourable for all good work. 

21. YaidhrathI Dosha: — This is also an evil 
aspect (Yoga) and should be avoided in all 
favourable activities. 

1 have given about a fairly clear- description 
of the ‘ evils ’ which are generally to be met with 
in all classical works on Mukurtha. The reader 



3G 


MUIIUHTIIA 


should not get scared away nt the thought of 
these large number of doshas or planetary evils 
which arc to be avoided if one is to elect a 
proper time for the fruition of an object in view. 
Man has to contend against a stupendous number 
■of evil agencies or discordant vibrations released 
by the planetary bodies and each of these 
maliadoshas seems to express eupliehiesticallyin 
particular types of evil energies which would 
affect adversely particular types of human 
activities. There arc seveial exceptions 
to these general doslias. One should always 
remember that in electing a suitable 
moment one should try to avoid the major 
doshas by fortifying the ascendant and taking 
advantage of the exceptions and ignoring the 
minor ones. 

The following combinations are held to 
neutralise the adverse yogas mentioned above. 

. X. The lagnathyajya referred to Supra 
prevails only, on particular days as per details 
below. In the first Navamsa — Wednesday and 
Saturday. In the middle Navamsa — Monday and 
Friday. In the last Navamsa — Tuesday, Thursday 
and Sunday. In other days the thyajyam , has no 
significance. 



‘evils’ defined 


3T 


2. Chandraslitama shows no evil when the 
Moon is waxing and occupies a benefic sign and 
a benefic navarasa. .The sting is lost when the 
Moon and the 8th lord are friends. 

3. Tuesday is not evil after midday. 

4. The aspects attributed to Vyatheepa- 
them, Yaidhrufci etc., become defunct after 
midday. 

5. No day of the week is blemished if the 
lord thereof is strongly placed in the .election 
chart. 

G. Venus, Mercury or Jupiter in iagna' will 
completely destroy all other adverse influences. 

7. Jupiter has the power of dispelling all 
the evils due to the lagna, navamsa and malefic 
aspects and render the time highly propitious. 

8. The mere presence of the Moon or the 
Sun in the 11th will act as an antidote for all 
the other evils obtaining in the horoscope. 

9. If the angles are well fortified, evil 
influences are immediately countered. 

10. A planet exalted in lagna will nullify 
afi the other adverse influences. 

11. Jupiter or Venus in a kendra and male- 
lies in 3, G or 11 will remove all the flaws 


38 


MUHURTKA 


arising on account of unfavourable week day, 
constellation, lunar day and yoga. 

Thus it will be seen that the most important 
question in muhurtha is the fortification of] lagna 
and its lord. 


CHAPTER VI 

ON CERTAIN BPECIAL YOGAS ' 

When a certain week day coincides with a 
certain asterism and a certain thitlii, it becomes 
specially auspicious for good work. In this 
chapter, I shall give a few such special combi- 
nations which go under {lie special distinction 
of Siddha Yogas. 

Sunday coinciding with 'the 1st, 4tli, 6th, 
7th, or 12th lunar day and ruled by the constel- 
lations Pushya, Hastha, Uttara, Uttarashadha, 
Mula, Sravana or Uttarabliadra gives rise to 
Siddha Yoga. 

Monday' identical with the 2nd, 7th or 12th 
lunar day and with the constellations Rohini, 
Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Chitta, Sravana, Sata- 
bhisha, Blwvishta or Purvabliadva. produces the 
same Yoga. »«„ * . 



SIDDHA YOGA 


39 


Tuesday falling on a day ruled by Aswini, 
Mrigasira, Chitta, Anuradlia, Moola, U tiara, 
Dhanisbta or Purvabhadra gives rise to 
Siddha Yoga. 

Wednesday coinciding with Bliadra arid 
Jaya and with the constellations Rohini, Mriga- 
sira, Aridra, Uttara, Uttarashadha or Animidha 
generates Siddha Yoga. 

Thursday identical with the 4th, 5th, 7th, 
9th, 13th or 14th lunar day and with the 
asterisms Makha, Pushya, Punarvasu, Swati, 
Purvashadlm, Purvabhadra, Revati or Aswini 
gives rise to Siddha Yoga. 

Friday ruled by Aswini, Bharani, Aridm, 
Uttara, Chitta, Swati, Purvasliadha or Revati 
coinciding with Nanda and Bhadm constitutes 
this beneficial Yoga. 

Saturday falling on a day ruled by Swati, 
Rohini, Visakha, Anuradlia, Dhanisbta or 
Satabhislia and with lunar days Bhadra and 
Kiktha generates the same auspicious Yoga. 

A Friday coinciding with Nanda (1st, Gtli 
and 11th lunar days), Wednesday identical with 
Bhadra (2nd, 7tli and 12th lunar days), Tuesday 
coinciding with Jaya (3rd, 8tli and IBtli lunar 
days), Saturday falling on a Riktha + bi ' * 



40 


MUHURTHA 


9th and 14th lunar days), and Thursday falling 
on 5th, 10th or 15th (Purna) lunar days con- 
stitute Siddha Yoga. 

Sunday to Saturday respectively coinciding 
with the constellations Hasta, Sravana, Aswini, 
Anuradha, Pushya, Revati and Roliini will give 
rise to Amita Siddha Yoga. 

The above special Yogas can be applied .with 
advantage to important elections and if in 
addition to the general strength of the day due 
to a special yoga, the lagna is also rendered 
strong, chances of success of the enterprise 
would be by far the greatest. 


CHAPTER VII 
PRE-NATAL CEREMONIES 

Before the aotual birth of a child three 
important ceremonies are enjoined to be per- 
formed. ^ They are nuptials (Nisheka), consum- 
mation (Garhhadana) and Piunsavana (change of 
sex)f K 

Nishekam is used to denote the first sexual 
contaot, while Garbliadana has reference to the 
subsequent deflorations. • Almost all the ancient 
.works on Muhurtha start from Namakarana— ; 



SACREDXESS OF SEX ACT 


41 


the ceremony after the birth .of a child — but we 
start from consummation as it is actually tho 
beginning of the prenatal existence of the child. 
Sexual union, pregnancy and reproduction of 
human species are the essentials on which the 
world exists. Sexual union should never be 
based upon simple sense gratification. There is 
a sacredness about sexual functions, and when 
moral and spiritual considerations are not 
respected and brought into play, the- result will 
be most unsatisfactory and all sorts of undesir- 
able progeny would be the products of promiscu- 
ous cohabitation. Men and women are bundles- 
of electricity. When they are brought together 
sexually a series of electrical currents would be 
released which may react on them favourably or 
adversely depending upon tlie harmonious or 
discordant nature of the vibrations released. 
Therefore the first sexual act should not be treated 
lightly and should be done only when planetary 
combinations are favourably disposed. Books on 
ancient Sexology and Astrology reveal that to in- 
dulge in coitus during the first four days of men- 
ses will lead to serious evil effects as the whole- 
physiological and nervous system of the woman 
would be in a state of tension owing to the 
almost continuous discharge of blood. So the 



42 


MUHURTHA 


first four days of -menses should be avoided. 
'Copulation on the 5th day tends to give rise to 
& daughter. In general, sexual union on odd 
-days indicates birth of female children while on 
-oven days, the birth of male children is indicated. 
In the first instance, sexual union is highly 
recommended on the 16th day of the menses as 
it is supposed to ensure not only happiness to 
the couple but also the birth of a dutiful and 
intelligent son. 

The constellations Sravaua, Rohiui, 
Anurndha, Swati, Revathi, Moola, Uttar a, 
Uttarashadha, Uttarablmdra Satabislia are 
highly favourable for nuptials. Pushyami, 
Dlianislita, Mrigasira, Aswini; Chitta, Punaivasu 
rare ordinary. The rest of constellations are to 
be rejected. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
rare auspicious days while Saturday, Tuesday 
rand Sunday should not be considered at all. 

All lunar days except the 4th, 8th, 9th, 14th, 
Full Moon and New Moon are good. The 
favourable signs are Taurus to Libra and Pisces. 
/The birth star (Janma Nakshatra), the lOtli star 
An u_ Janma ) and the 19th star ( Thrijanma) 
•should be avoided. 



CHANGE OF SEX 


43 


•At the time of nuptials, the 8th house 
should be occupied by no planet. Subject to 
'this proviso, even Sagittarius and Aquarius may 
be selected as auspicious. 

Pamaavatia : — This means change of sex. The 
Hindus had long ago known the processes 
’whereby the sex of the foetus could be changed 
by performing certain remedies and by admini- 
stering certain medicines when sex-differenti- 
aition is about to set in. The possibility of 
•change of sex long known to the Hindus was 
being ridiculed by Western Scientists. Bnt 
■during the last 3 or 4 decades, the opinion of the 
•scientists underwent a gradual change and most 
•of them now admit such a possibility. For the 
information of the reader, I may just make a few 
•observations of modem medical men on this 
.all-important question. ,5 . 

Professor Thuiy first started a^fcheory about 
the possibility of changing the sex of the foetus 
in the womb. This was taken up by Professor 
Unterbcrger. Bernard Macfadden has reached 
•certain conclusions regarding the predetermi- 
nation of the sex with a success claimed in 
■1)0% of cases experimented. According to tho 
theory of Thury “ the biogenetic condition, pre- 
vailing in the female organism in the beginning 



44 


MUHURTHA 


of the interval between two menstrual periods is- 
favourable lo girls. Towards the end of this- 
interval, shortly before the new period, it is 
favourable to boys. In between, the chances 
are even ". . It is possible that the chemistry of 
the mother undergoes natural changes at certain 
times which correspond to the condition of 
alkalinity or acidity created artificially bj r Unter- 
burger with tho aid of bicarbonate or lactic 
acid. 

There are, according to Davenport, probably 
four hundred theories of sex determination 
promulgated during the last two or three hundred 
years. One theory generally accepted by 
biologists maintains that sex is determined by 
the so called X chromosomes. In the female 
there arc two of these chromosomes. In the 
male • there is only. one. Professor Blulim 
suggests that the male chromosomes move more 
quiokly in alkaline solution, than the chromo- 
somes which cany the feminine principle! A 
teaspoonful of bicarbonate of soda or one spoon- 
ful of lactic acid may thus determine the sex of 
the ohild. Generally 105 boys are born for 
every 100 ’girls. The mortality among the boys, 
is somewhat greater. It lias been found that 
after great and destructive wars, where men are- 



WARS AND 3IAX.E BIRTHS 


45 


tilled on a large scale, the numher of male births 
increases. Nature thns restores the balance of 
Rexes. We have known parents some of them 
longing for girls while others want boys for 
keeping up their family traditions and for 
continuance of their lines. This will be so 
specially in cases of inheritance and succession 
to thrones and large landed and financial estates. 
Many ware and bloodshed were the results of 
kings and queens having no sons to succeed 
them. In almost all the countries the dynasties 
were kept up through sons. Matriarchy forms au 
exception. It was found out by experiment that 
a high acid secretion was frequently responsible 
for sterility in the female. "When douche were 
applied in tlic form of sodium bicarbonate, 
where there were no pathological changes in 
either husband or wife the results were • most 
gratifying. The pregnancy developed* after the 
next period and in every case the child was a 
hoy. Professor Unterberger observes “ that the 
most important thing appears to he the fact that 
the characteristics of the female organs exercise 
a great influence on the determination of the sex 
which strange to say has been ignored hereto- 
fore.” Professor Nicolai Konstantinoviteli of 
Moscow discovered an olectric treatment which 



46 


MUHURTHA 


separates and segregates the male and female* 
spermatozoa. Children .of either sex may be 
obtained by using chromosomes of the opposite 
sex in artificial impregnation. Natural 
spermatozoa are deposited in the curved end of 
the tube filled with a physiological solution. A 
slight electrical current draws the male and 
female cells to opposite ends of the tubes. The 
male spermatozoa are drawn to the anodes or 
the side where the current enters the tube, and 
the female sperms to the cathodes, where the 
current leaves. Macfaden says “ conception time 
with reference to the menstrual cycle 
normally rune its 00111*86 in twenty eight days 
and so corresponds in length to the lunar month”. 
Here is a feminine physiological habit which in 
some ways at present clearly understood closely 
corresponds to the movements of the Moon. 
The theoiy is, that if fertilised when first 
discharged from the ovary the ovum is female in 
tendency while latter as the ovum ages it 
becomes male, so that fertilisation betweeh the 
3 rd and the 5 th days after menstruation is liable 
to produce a girl, between the 5 th and 8 th days, 
a boy or a girl, and between the 8 th and 12 th 
days a boy. We have evidence that certain physio- 
logical habits curiously correspond to the lunar 



ANABOLISM AND KATABOLISM 4T 

daily cycles even as the habit of the menstruation,, 
a sex function corresponds to the lunar monthly 
cycle. It has been suggested by the mighty 
Darwin that since life apparently originated on 
the beaches of primordial sea where it was^ 
alternately covered and uncovered by the tides,, 
through countless ages, certain life rhythms and 
physiological habits were formed in all living: 
creatures to correspond with those tidal 
rlij-thms, which in their turn were regulated b} r 
the Sun and Moon. The primitive cell which 
was the cradle of the Life-Force, at that time 
went through alternating period of activity 
and quiescence. The scientific name for 
these two physiological phases is Katabolism 
and Anabolism. Physiologically Anabolism and 
Katabolism correspond to malcness and female- 
ucss . These facts lead to some interesting 

conclusions about sex as possibly determined not 
merely by the time of tbe lunar month, but tlie 
time of tlie lunar day at which conception tabes 
place. Here all the greatest scientists on 
matters of conception and sex formation are 
agreed on the physiological effects of cycles of 
^ hmar days and lunar months. We shall now 
quote from our astrological literature, what 
they have unanimously said about the appear- 



48 


MUHURTHA 


ances of menses, how the foetus develops in the 
womb, in what month the sex is formed and by 
what methods the sex of the unborn child in the 
womb should be known and by what methods 
the sex of the child may be changed as per 
desire of the parents. 

Occasionally one reads in papers about the 
reversal or change of sex to a certain degree even 
in adults. This phenomenon has been actually 
^witnessed, by no less a man than late Prof. 
B. Siuyanarain Rao. In the history of science the 
ancient Hindus occupy a foremost place because 
thousands of years ago, they had anticipated 
and in fact achieved what to the modems appear 
as marvels of biology. ^-Of course it is a fashion 
with those who have 'received the European 
' system- of education to laugh at things they 
cannot explain with the aid of their own pet 
theories. 

Charaka, the great Hindu physician, has 
dwelt at length with the question of change of 
sex. The ancients had not only studied the 
theory but they have given us practical rules 
whereby the sex of the unborn child in the 
womb may be known in advance and changed, 
if so desired. Ceremonies are actually laid down 
in the Vedas for performance by the father and 


CASE OF ANDREAS SPARRE 


49 


the mother with a view to give the child in the 
womb the sex that is desired. These rites are 
called Pamsavana. The etymology of the word is: 
Pnng (male) syate (is produced) auena (by this); 
in other words the male-producing rite. These 
rites are performed even unto this day by every 
orthodox* Hindu. • Pumsayaxa is performed just 
after the expiration of three months from the 
date of conception. 

Before giving further details about pdjisa* 
tana let us bring to the attention of the readers 
an interesting phenomenon which recently hap- 
pened in Europe. Andreas Sparre, a Danish 
painter, married at* the age of 20, a student 
artist studying in a^jlike academy as his in 
Paris. They had a happy life for some time. 
Few years later Andreas Sparre happened to 
dress up in fun as a woman. The clothes suited 
him and he looked like a girl. One of his friends 
called him Lili and he liked this name. Soon after- 
wards Andreas began to feel that Lili was after 
all a real individual — a separate personality, exist- 
ing within himself. Gradually, this second per- 
sonality pushed to the background, liis maleness. 
Andreas experienced bleeding from the mouth 
and nose and this was regarded as a form of 
menstruation. Of course there was a psychological 



50 


MUHURTHA 


change too that he was becoming more and 
more feminine. With the passing of time a 
conviction grew in his mind that though male in 
his outward form internal)}' he possessed the 
female sexual organs. Physicians and surgeons 
whom he consulted could not offer any expla- 
nation for his dual personality. At last he 
consulted a German specialist who declared 
after a very careful examination that Andreas 
possessed female sexual organs within himself. 
After this he was- operated upon by Prof. 
Gebliard and after the operation the attending 
nurses remarked to Andreas- that his voice had 
completely changed and that it was a shrill 
woman’s voice. Then cigarettes and cigars 
nauseated him and ercifliis handwriting turned 
feminine. In this first operation the male-sex 
glands were completely removed and Andreas 
Sparre was no longer a man. After the second 
operation Grete, tlic wife of And ryes, wrote as 
follows in her diary : — 

“ Not until a few hours! 
had happened inside — a hum 
born a man, who was my hi 
my comrade— rhad now bee* 
pletc wow 



SEX DIFFERENTIATION' 


51 


“ But the thought which haunts me is that 
though Andreas may now be extinguished, and 
though Lili may have risen like a phoenix from 
the ashes, yet in the world outside Andreas is 
still living in the eyes of the law, and I am his 
wife. Who is capable of grasping this horrow, 
this fantastic idea, this unique happening. ” 

What are we to think of this strange and 
tragic case of Andreas Sparre — a case unique in 
medical history. The case of Obalamma becoming 
ObaIachari(vide Female Horoscopy by Prof. B. Surya- 
narain Rao) is also equally interesting. 

Though medically .it is i m p o s s i b 1 e to 
distinguish sex in the embryo, astrologically it is 
possible to know beforehand — based on the : 
conception Lagna — whether the child would be 
male or female. Doctors also opine that even in 
the most normal and unambiguous individual 
the rudiments of the organs of the other sex are 
present throughout life. Pumsavana means not 
only rites but also administering of certain 
medicines. Who knows, the proper performance 
► of pumsavana may enable us to change sexes of 
even adults, because the medicines accompanied 
by mantras may act on the glandular secretions 
and change the very nature of such secretions. 


52 


MUHCRTHA 


The cases of Andreas and Obalamma suggest 
that change of sex is possible and that ancient 
Hindus when they talked of this phenomenon 
were not merely guessing but were treading on 
solid and scientific grounds. 

A perusal of the various texts in Sanskrit 
bearing on astrology and medicine reveals that 
pumsavaNA is closely connected with the plane- 
tary influences on embryonic development. All 
the phases of fche union of the virile spermatozoon 
with the mature ovum called impregnation, the 
fixation of the impregnated ovum, called concep- 
tion, and the development of the foetus are 
governed by the Moon and other planets. No 
birth takes place by chance. In most cases 
impregnation follows very shortly after coitus 
and it is the' time of coitus that is generally 
taken according ^to Hindu Astrology for the 
nisheka or conception horoscope. The period 
of gestation is the time which elapses between 
the conception and parturition, during whiok 
the child first as embryo, then as foetus is 
developing in the womb. Beginning with the 
third week, the head bend in the embryo is 
quite marked which gradually increases as 
development goes oh, and at the end of the 
third week the heart and all the organs have 


RATIONALE OP PUMSAYANA 


53 


been laid down and limbs begin to make their 
appearance as small buds, not unlike those of 
the frog, and the embryo closely resembles any 
other mammalian embryo at a corresponding 
stage. The chief changes in the first month 
(governed of course by Venus) are the formation, 
of the face and external ear, and the develop- 
ment of the limbs. The eyes, nasal pits, 
maxillary processes, ears and nose are now 
visible. * _ ' 

In the second month of pregnancy — ruled 
by Mars — the plasm is enveloped by the amnion. 
Mars brings the development of the membranes 
aud strong expansion of them. The brain begins 
to develop, the head becomes considerably larger 
and the human characters are all established. , 
The embryo may now be spoken of as the foetus, 
which has passed its quadruped stage. 

Now we come to the third month influenced 
largely by Jupiter — the month in which 
pumsavana has to be performed if one desires to 
have a son bom to him. It is in the third 
MONTH Tire DIFFERENTIATION OF SEX IS BROUGHT 
about, as also the development of the genitals. 
Jupiter, a masculine planet, presides over this 
month. Thus it will be seen that in the 


64 


MUHURTHA 


Belection of the time for performing pumsavana 
the ancients had in view very scientific 
reasons. As difference of sex occurs in the 
third month, the medicines and mantras 
administered under the influence of certain 
constellations would certainly be capable enough 
to change the sex to the desire of the 
individual concerned. Without caring to bestow 
serious thought on such questions, the modemer 
is apt to dismiss the whole thing as the product 
of superstition. 

We shall now give a few hints from the 
famous charaka samhita and it is for readers to 
make use of such hints to their own advantage* 

Cliaraka^ says : — “ Instructions will be laid 
down about those Vedic rites by which the sex 
of the child (in the womb) before its mani- 
festation may be changed. Verily of rites duly 
performed and characterised by propriety of 
time and place, the capacity to prod'uce 
desirable fruits is ordained. Observing that 'a 
woman has conceived, pumsayana should be 
administered to her before the manifestation of 
the sex of the child in the womb. 

“Obtaining two unbroken buds from two 
twigs procured from the eastern and northern 


MEDICAL REMEDIES 


C5 


sides of a banian ( Ficus indica, Linn. ) growing in 
a co\vpen, as also a single grain of paddy and 
a single seed of Masha ( phaseolus radiatus, 
Roxb. ) both well developed, or two -seeds of 
white mustard, and throwing them into a 
quantity of curds, the woman (that has con- 
ceived) should be made to drink it under the 
constellation of Pushya”. Another Pumsavanam 
medicine is the following: — 

The kalka or paste of (a) jeevaka*, 
(b) rishabhaka§, (c) Apamargat or (d) 
Sabachara* - or of each if desirable — should be 
boiled with milk and given to the woman to 
drink. 

“Or, the likeness of a man, of very small 
proportions, made of gold, or silver or iron, 
made red-hot in fire and then dipped into a 
measure of curds, or milk, or water, should be 
swallowed, without leaving any remnant, under 
the influence of the constellation pushyami. 
Under the same nakshatra of Pushyami, the 

' Jeevaka is no longer identifiable or procurable. Hindu doctors 
find a substitute in GUDUCHI or TINOSFORA CORDIFOLIA. Miqs. 

$ This is also not identifiable. The substitute is V AN GCAL O- 
CHANA or bamboo manna. 

■f Achayaranthes aspera, Linn. 

J Barlema cristata, Linn. 



60 


MUIIURTHA 


the woman may be made to inhale the hot 
vapour of a cake ( pishta or pishtaka ) that is 
being baked ( on the fire ) and then dissolving 
that cake in a measure of water, the mixture 
should be cast over the threshold of the door* 
This water the woman should then, using a. 
stiok of cotton, apply to her right nostril”. 

If the above remedies are administered 
under the favourable and auspicious influences 
of constellation, the sex in 4 tho womb of the 
woman is supposed to change. The subject is 
vast and we shall again reour to this on a sub- 
sequent occasion. Who has studied and who 
has tested all these methods ? Why label them 
as useless and unscientific when you do not 
know what they are. 

The ceremony of Pumsavannm should be 
celebrated in the 3rd month_when signs of preg- 
nancy are evident. All lunar days except the 4th, 
6th, 8th, 9tli, 12th,® 14tli, Full Moon and New 
Moon days are good. 

All signs except Gemini, Cancer and Virgo 
are auspicious. Virgo should be avoided as it is 
specially adverse. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are beneficial. The 8th house from the ascendant 



SEEMANTHA 5 T 

should be vacant. The Moon’s presence in 
lsgna or the 12th and the ascendant being 
aspeeted by Venus brings on prosperity. Bene- 
fies should be disposed in quadrants or trines. 

There is another ceremony named Seeman- 
tha immediately following Pumsavanam, being 
perfonned in the 5th or 7tli month. This is 
ordained only in regard to first conceptions. If 
the time-schedule cannot be kept up, it should 
not be abandoned, but the function must be 
performed at least before delivery. This is the 
view of Bage Sankha. 

For Seemantha, Rohini, Mrigasira, Punar- 
vasu, Pushyami, Uttara, Uttarashadha, Hastha r 
Sravana and Bevati are auspicious. Some are of 
the opinion that under unavoidable circum- 
stances, even Aswini, Anuradlia and Mula may 
be deemed auspicious. The 4th, 6th, 8th, 9th, 
14th lunar days and New Moon day must be 
avoided. "When the Moon is dignified Full Moon 
day is not condemned. Sunday, Tuesday and 
Saturday should be avoided. The rest of the- 
week days are good. All signs except Leo and 
Scorpio are auspicious. The 8th house from the- 
ascendant must be free. Generally speaking, the- 
3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th and 22nd constellations should 



•58 


MUHURTHA 


be avoided. The Moon should not be in the 
£th house. So far as this particular ceremony is 
concerned, the month ranks first in importance. 
Hence even if Jupiter and Venus arc combust, 
■such a circumstance may be ignored. 


CHAPTER VIII 
POST-NATAL CEREMONIES 

Naroakarana op’ naming the child: — The proper 
■day for this ceremony would be the 10th, 12th 
•or 16th day of the child’s birth. If this is not 
possible, then an auspicious day must be fixed 
for the purpose. 

Anuradha, Punarvasu, Mnkha, Ufctara, 
Uttarasbadha, Uttarabhadra, 'Satabisha, Swati, 
Hhanishfca, Sravana, Robin i, Aswini, Mrigasira, 
Revati, Hasta and Pushya are auspicious. 

The 4th, 6th, 8th, ,6th, l*2th, 14th lunar" 
days and Full Moon and New Moon should be 
avoided. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are good. Other week' days are not good. As 
far as possible, tbe lagna most be rendered 
strong and the 8th house should be unoccupied^ 



FIRST FEEDING 


59 


Fixed 6igns are preferable and common signs are 
£ood when occupied by benefics. 

If Jupiter occupies a kendra or tlirikona . 
and a malefic is in the 11th, the time is held to , 
be very auspicious. Another equally propitious 
combination is the time when the lagna falls in 
a benefic sign with a malefic in the 3rd, Venus 
in 12th and the Moon in a dignified position. 

Generally the name to be given to a male 
ohild should consist of an even number of 
letters, (e.g., Rama, Krishna, etc.) while a 
female child should be given a name containing 
uneven number of letters (e.g„ Parvati, Janaki, 
etc. ) The name must also be appropriate to the 
ruling star. 

Cradling : — The ' best time for this would be 
the 10th, 12th, 10th, or the 22nd day after 
its birth. 

First Feeding on Rice ( Annapraeana) : — Let the 
-first feeding on rice be done in the 6th, 8th, 9th, 
or 12th month on days ruled by Aswini, Mriga- 
sira, Punarvasu, Dhanishta, Pushyami, Hastha, 
Swati, Anuradha, Sravana, Satabhisha, TJttara, 
and Chitta, avoiding the usual unfavourable 
lunar days. The 10th house must be unoccupied. 
The first feeding should not be done in the 



CO 


MUHURTHA 


constellation of Aridm, Krittika, Jyeshfca,. 
Bhamni, Asleslia, Purvashadha and Purvabhadra. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are good, Aries, Scorpio and Pisces are inauspi- 
cious. Mercury, Mars and Venus should not 
occupy respectively the 7th, 8tli and Oth houses. 
Mercury, Jupiter or Venus in lagna is highly 
commendable. No malefic should occupy 
the ascendant. 

The most important factor in this function 
is the month: honcc one should not mind even 
if Jupiter and Venus are combust. 

Ear Boring ( Karnayedha ) : — This should be- 
done on the 12th or 16th day of the birth of the 
child or in the 0th, 7th or 8th mouth, either in 
the forenoon or in the afternoon but never 
during night. A day ruled by two asterisms or 
two lunar days is not propitious as also the 
other lunar days usually declared as inaus- 
picious. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are good. At the time of boring the ears, the 
8th house should be unoccupied. Aquarius? 
Iieo and Scorpio should be rejected. 

Tonsm-e (Chowlam): — The learned say that' 
Chowlam is a very important karma because it- 


TONSURE 


61 


involves tlie cutting of liair which means dis- 
charge of electrical currents from the child for 
the first time. The ceremony when properly 
done is said to prolong the life of the child. It 
-should not be done when the mother of the 
child is pregnant. Ghowlam may be performed 
in the 3rd or 5th year when Jupiter and Venus 
are free from combustion and when the Sun is 
in the Tropic of Cancer. The bright fortnight 
is said to give longevity while the dark fortnight 
is supposed to affect the health. 

The 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th, 11th,. and 13th 
lunar days are good. The 4th, 1st, 6th, 8th, 9th, 
14th 'and New and Full Moon days should 
be rejected. 

Punarvasu, Mrigasira, Dhanishta, Sravana, 
Bevati, Pushya, Chitta, Aswini, Hasta, are fa- 
vourable; Swati, Roliini, Satabhisha, Uttara, 
Utfcarabhadra, Uttarashadlia are ordinary. 
Tonsure should always be done in the 'forenoon. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are good. 

Cancer, Virgo, Gemini, Pisces, Libra, Taurus 
and Capricorn rising gives rise to good results. 
The rest are not beneficial. But they can be 
employed provided benefics occupy the lagna 



<54 


MUHUJITHA * 


disposed to the ascendant at the time of 
Upanayanam. 

The best season is when the Sun is in his 
northern course, (between Capricorn and 
Gemini). The lunar months of Magha, Phalguna, 
Chaitra and Vaisakha are good. The 2nd, 3rd, 
6th, 7th, 10th and 13th lunar dayB in the 
bright haff and the 1st, 2nd and 3rd in 
the dark half are held to be auspicious. The 
lunar days to be avoided are 4th, 8th, 9th, 11th, 
12th, 14th and Full and New Moon days. 
Some are of opinion that the 13th is good. * 

Exception : Even the 14th lunar day may be 
treated as good if the boy is above the prescribed 
age. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are propitious. Wednesday must be rejected if 
Mercury is combust. Sunday is ordinary, while 
Tuesday should be invariably rejected. 

The following constellations are good: 
Anuradha, Hasfca, Chitta, Swati, Sravana, Dhani- 
shta, Satabhisha, Uttara, Uttarashadlia, Uttara- 
bhadra, Revati, Rohini, Mrigasira, Aswini, 
Punarvasu and Pushyami. 

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra 
and Aquarius are good. The other signs should 



GOOD DAYS FOR UPANAYANA 65 

be avoided. According to Vasishta and Garga, 
the 3rd day in the bright half of the month of 
Chaifcra and Vaisakha and the 7th day in the 
bright half of the lunar month Magha and 
Phalgtma are highly favourable. 

The Moon must not occupy the 6th, 8th, or 
12th house. Malefics should not be posited in 
quadrants. The ceremony should take place 
before noon. The 8th house from the lagna 
must be unoccupied. 

The third house should be fortified by the 
situation by either malefics or benefics, while 
the 6th should bo devoid of benefic. Mars and 
Saturn should be avoided in the 5th. 

Let Mars and Saturn be avoided in the 
2nd from the election chart ; as otherwise they 
will make the boy’s intellect dull. Similarly 
their situation in the 12th should also be 
avoided. The Moon should alwaj's be avoided 
in lagna. But however if Cancer is the Ascen- 
dant and the Moon and Jupiter are in conjunc- 
tion and malefics are in 3, 6 and 11, the evil 
attached to the situation of Moon- in lagna 
becomes lost. The following malefic yogaa 
should also be avoided : 

5 



08 


MUHURTHA 


more than a civil agreement between the parties, 
the extent of which only affects themselves. It 
is the basis of the family, and its dissolution as 
well as its formation is a matter of public policy 
in which the body or community is deeply intere- 
sted and it is to be governed by other considera- 
tions than those which obtain with regal'd to 
any other civil contract that the ground which 
shall invalidate the contract must be something 
more than a mere representation as to collateral 
matters that no ground will anuul a marriage 
which does not go to the very essence of the 
contract”. 

Marriage both in the social and economic 
sense, is a sexual relationship entered into with 
the intention of making it permanent. In 
India, marriage was and is regarded as a religious 
sacrament and marriage comprehends the 
equalitj’ of the partner in respect of Dlianna 
(right conduct), Art ha (financial position), 
Kama ( sex relation ) and Moksha ( final salva- 
tion). The universality of marriage constitutes 
one of the most striking differences between the 
Hindus and the other races. When the question 
of marriage is considered, various factors 
demand! our attention, Important ones being - 
physical fitness, mental qualities, heredity. 



MARRIAGE 


09 


sexual compatibility and social and economic 
status. * ’ 

In tlie modern world so much is made of the 
sex element in marriage that the other equally 
important factors, social and psychological, arc 
practically ignored. The Hindu Sasfcras, having 
in view the climatic and ethnological conditions 
of India, have fixed the maximum and minimum 
age limits for marriage. Marriages between 
par-ties belonging to the same gotra are 
prohibited on account of tlie dysgeuic influence 
on.the offspring. Inter-racial, inter-communal and 
inter-religious marriages are equally con- 
demned because in such matches there are great 
cultural differences. There can be very little 
sympathy between .the parties. After a careful 
consideration of all these factors, the Hindus 
had devised an astrological means of judging 
marriage compatibility whereby the relations 
between- the couple may stand the strain of 
maladjustments. Pseudo-sexologists and soci- 
ologists are not wanting in India who are ever 
ready to point out their finger of contempt at 
the sound and sensible institution of marriage 
developed by the Hindus after decades of ex- 
perience and experiments. We are not concerned 
with such socialistic theories advocating 



70 


MUHURTHA 


companionate marriage mid encouraging 
unbridled licence in love affairs. They may bo 
alright iucountries like Russia and America — 
the melting pots of different races. But they 
cannot hold water in a country like India whose 
civilisation, culture and social laws are peculiar 
te Ucr geographical and historical positions- 
Inter-communal and inter-mcial marriages are a 
gamble. 

The Hindus have solved this complex prob- 
lem of marriage selection by recourse to astrolo- 
gical considerations. If investigations into the 
various kutas are undertaken before marriage is 
contracted, there will bo fewer tragedies than at 
present, and less marital infidelity. Modern 
science has devised no means to find out the 
compatibility between tlio marrying couple- 
Sexologists suggest that the bride and bride- 
groom should subject themselves to a thorough 
medical examination. Although this sounds 
reasonable, it makes an important omission in 
that mere physical fitness does not ensure 
complete marital happiness. Happiness largely 
rests upon so many other factors that the aid of 
astrology should be sought for by every ‘sensible 
individual. 



MARRIAGE 


71 


In selecting horoscopes for marriage pur- 
poses, three factors have to be carefully eonsi- 
derd. The}’ are : — 

(a) The longevity of the bride and the 
bridegroom. 

( b ) The larger strength of the 7th and 8th 
houses. 

(c) Agreeability in regard to the Kutas 
commonly designated as Puruthtliam. 

"When there is no longevity in the case of 
bride, the horoscope must be rejected even 
though the 7tli house may be strong or the 
requisite number of units are available. Like- 
wise when the 7tli house is weak and is consi- 
derably blemished, the horoscope to be matched 
should have antidotes or counteracting 
influences. 

The puruthtlias or tlio units of agreement 
should be considered only when there is 
genera) sympathy between the horoscopes of 
the parties to be brought together. The exist- 
ing practice almost all over India and particu- 
larly in South is highly defective and dangerous 
as horoscopes arc rejected simply because they 
do not conform to certain puruththas, while the 
most important factors such as longevity. 



72 


MUHUJRTHA 


widowhood, etc., are completely ignored. Therefore 
it. is very essential to examine, to start with, the 
general strength of the charts; and when good 
longevity is indicated in both the horoscopes and 
they are free from the afflictions in regard to 
the 7th and 8th houses, further agreement should 
be judged. When Mars and Venus aro in the 
7th, the boy or girl concerned will be highly 
sexed and such nil individual should be mated 
to one who has similar instincts and not to 
a person having Mercury or Jupiter in the 
7th, as tli is makes one-sexed. When sexual 
incompatibility sets in marriage, life proves 
charmless and friction arises between the 
couple. Therefore it is the bouuden duty of 
the pavents to consult learned astrologers and 
not to entrust the work of comparing horoscopes 
to all persons who have no parctical experience. 
History is replete with ill-matohed marriages 
and the most miserable lives the couple had 
to live. ’ 

Socrates, philosopher as he was reputed to 
be, .was united in marriage to Xantippe who, if 
rightly reported, perpetually ridiculed his philo- 
sophical teachings and mercilessly nagged him 
in his home. Once when he had invited a dis- 
tinguished friend to dinner, she spitefully 



MARRIAGE 


73 


'emptied the contents of a vessel upon his head. 
Plato sympatkisingly asked him why he bore 
such indignities. Meek!}' replied the old philo- 
sopher : “ She teaches me patience and charity, 
and shows to me that if I can bear with her, I 
can bear all else in the world.” Alcibiades, noted 
for brilliancy of intellect and a most graceful 
•carriage of personality, was strangely unfortu- 
nate in his marital relations. Too proud to direct- 
ly desert his wife he at one time contemplated 
and even attempted suicide as a release from his 
bonds. Pericles, ruling Athens for 50 years, find- 
ing it brick and leaving it marble, was not only 
orator and statesman, but in other ways the 
most discrete and majestic character of that 
remote period. His relations with Aspasin cau- 
sed bitterest criticism. His wife, being a fault- 
finding, social drag, failing to stand by him 
supporting him in his great work for the 
upbuilding of Athens, he deliberately parted 
with her, bestowing upon her half of bis estates. 
Plato, warned by Socrates, his teacher, though 
noble, wealthy, scholastic and exceedingly 
popular in the higher walks of Grecian society 
never married, though a great admirer and lover 
•of women. Cicero, the Roman orator and early 
pleader in the forum, studied at the feet of Zeno 



74 


MUIIURHIA 


and Demetrius and married the heiress Terentia, 
It is needless to produce tlic full story of his 
unsatisfactory married life. Milton, holding - 
in English literature one of the highest places- 
as poet and patriot, wrote three pamphlets upon 
divorce and lived not merely unhappily but at- 
times miserably with his wife, Mary Powelb 
Thomas Carlyle's married life was rough as a- 
tempestuous sea, and accordingly far from being 
' happy. Dickens, as writer, author and world 
painter of human emotions, stood for a time in 
Great Britain unrivalled and yet his matrimonial 
home life was a most painful failure. We can 
multiply the instances any number. In the- 
. modern times, America counts such social 
ship -wrecks by thousands upon thousands- 
.both in the lower and the higher planes of 
, marital life. In India the number is on the 
increase. All these tell their own sad stories of 
connubial dissatisfaction and family wretched- 
ness. Readers must note that in the examples- 
given above, the married lives were not? 
shattered by the death of wife, or husband butr 
they proved tragic because of the dislike bet- 
ween husband and wife. Having read the above 
paragraphs, the reader may be tempted to put 
the question “ Is marriage — true banrtoniaL 



MABRIAGE 


75- 


marriage — possible at the present state of the 
world’s civilisation?” The quick answer is in 
the affirmative. 

A careful consideration of the important- 
astrological works reveals the following' 
information: — 

( 1) If Knjft is in the 7tlr house unaspected 
by benches, there will be frequent quarrels in the 
married life often leading to misunderstandings 
and separation. 

( *2 ) When Saturn is in the 8th house, and 
particularly in a square to Mars, the married 
life will he crossed by discord, lack of mutual 
understanding and absence of real attachment. 

( 3 ) When Leo is Lagna and the 7th lord 
Saturn is in the 2nd, the husband will be 
completely subservient to the wife carrying out- 
all her orders. 

( 4 ) Saturn in the 7th house is also indi- 
cative ..of unhappiness in 'marriage. 

(o) According to prasxa marga, the famous- 
Kerala work on Astrology, if the Sun and Venns- 
occupy the 5th, 7th or 9th houses then the 
native will lack marital happiness. 

(6) A strong malefic in the 4th, particularly 
Mars, is not conducive to conjugal happiness.. 



70 


MUHURTHA 


(7) If in the ashtakavarga of Venus, the' 
7th house from Venus contains a large number 
of hindus (positive units) and the wife is 
born in any of the asterisms of the Sun, then 
his wife will be as dear to him as life. 

(8) When the longitude of the 7tli house 
falls in a malefio Navamsa, the wife will be bad 
in nature and frequent quarrels and mis- 
understandings will ensue. 

(9) If the lords of the 7th and 1st are 
friends then native will be loved by her wife. 
•Otherwise there will be hatred. 

The above combinations do not speak of 
•either the death of wife or more than one 
marriage. They simply state that the disposi- 
tions of planets in a certain manner, in the 
•(male's or female’s) horoscope, render the 
marital life unhappy. 

(10) Make the necessary reductions in the 
ASHTAKAVARGA*of Venus.. Mark those rasis 
that contain bindus or dots. Then, take that 
Rasi which contains more clots and get the 
bride from the direction indicated by that rasi. 
The marriage will bring real happiness. 

- See Chapter XXVI, HINDU PREDICTIVE ASTROLOGY by 0. V. 

Raman. 


MARRIAGE 


7 T 


When evil combinations indicating misery 
in married life are present in the horoscope of a 
bride then tlie same can be mitigated* by 
marrying her to a boy whose horoscope has 
similar evil combinations. Tlie evils can also 
be avoided by testing tlie marriage adaptability' 
and by performing tlie marriages in proper 
Mulinrthas. 

Therefore with a view to avoid such 
unpleasant consequences, the astrological 
works of the Maliarshies have laid down certain 
units of strength and agreement and when 
these are agreeable, the married couple would 
live happily in spite of external and physical 
discomforts like poverty, etc. 

Maharsliies have claimed that by electing a 
proper time or Mulnirtha for marriage, several 
o! the evil indications in the charts of the couple 
can be minimised to a great extent. 

In this chapter, I have confined myself to 
the elucidation of rules governing marriage 
adaptability. It is presumed that before apply- 
ing these rules, tlie horoscopes have been judged 
already in regard to tlie 7th and 8tli houses. 

There are 12 factors to be considered in 
order to judge the suitability for a proposed 



82 


MUHURTHA 


constellations, there will be frequent quarrels and 
want of agreement in sex-matters. So the best 
way is to mate a male belonging to a male constel- 
lation with a female belonging to a female 
constellation. The Kutas in general lay down 
the foundation for marriage happiness. 

Therefore the Yoni Kuta takes into account 
tlie sexual'aspeot of marriage and indicates the 
sex affinities such as the degree of sex-urge,' 
sex-compatibility, the size of copulatory organs 
and so on. Havelock Ellis says that “ out of 500 
consecutive cases coming for advice (1930) all 
but one showed sexual maladjustment as a 
complicating factor". This reveals to us the 
importance of Yoni Kuta. All the 27 constel- 
lations have been assigned certain animals and 
sexes as given below: — 


Male- 

Female. 

Class of Yoni. 

Aswini 

Satabhisha 

Horse 

Bharani 

Reyathi 

Elephant 

PUSHYA 

Krittika 

Sheep 

Rohini 

Mrigasira 

Serpent 

Moola 

Aridra 

Dog 

Aslesha 

PUNARVASU 

Cat 

Makha 

PUBBA _ 

Rat 

Uttar a 

Uttakabhadra 

Cow 



- Male. 


Female. 


Class of Yoni- 


Swathi Hastha Buffalo 

Yisakha Cihttha Tiger 

Jyeshta " Anooradha Hare 
POORVASHADHA SHRAVANA MONKEY 

POORVABHADRA DHANISHTA LlON 

Uttarashadha Mongoose. 


Marriage between the constellations indi- 
cating same class of yoni and between the male 
and female stars of that yoni conduces to great 
happiness, perfect harmony and progeny. If 
the male and female happen to be bom in 
friendly yonies, but both representing female 
constellations there will be fair happiness and 
agreement. If the couple belong both to male 
constellations there will be constant quarrels 
and unhappiness. If marriage takes place 
between constellations indicating unfriendly 
yonies the marriage must be avoided under all 
risks. For example if marriage takes place 
between a male born in Moola and female bom 
in Aridra it will turnout very happy. The 
constellations Moola and Aridra represent 
■ the male and female organs of a dog. The union 
of these is agreeable and conduces to favourable 
results to the fullest extent. If marriage takes 
place between a man bom in the constellation 



84 


JIUHURTHA 


Satabhisba and a girl born in Punarvasu, both 
representing the female stars, the marriage 
is passable but not so good as in the first 
instance. Marriages between persons belonging 
to constellations indicating inimical yonies are 
not recommended.' The number of units for 
Yam Kuta is 4. 

Example: — Both Mrigasira and Dhanislita 
are female constellations, the one typifying the 
yoni of a serpent and the other that of a lion. 
Hence Yoni Kuta is not present. The following 
pairs are hostile and in matching Yoni Kuta, 
they should be avoided. 

Cow and tiger; elephantsmd lion; horse and 
buffalo ; dog and hare ; serpent and mongoose ; 
monkey and cat; and cat and rat. In a similar 
way, similar pairs of constellations typifying 
other hostile pairs as they occur in nature should 
be avoided. 

0. Rasi Kuta : — If the Rasi of the _ boy 
happens tO'be the 2nd^pm that of the girl and 
if the Rasi of the girl happens to be the 12th 
from that of the boy, very evil results will flow. 
But if, on the other hand, the Rasi of the boy 
falls in the 12th from the girl’s or the Rasi of 
the girl is in the 2nd from that of the boy 



RASI KUTA 85 

astrology predicts longevity for the couple. If the 
Rasi of the boy is the 3rd from that of the girl 
there -will , be misery and sorrow. But if the 
Basi of the girl is the 3rd from that of the boy, 
there will be happiness. 

If the boy’s Basi falls in the fourth from that 
of the girl’s then there be will great poverty ; but 
if the Basi of the girl happens to fall in the 4th 
from the boy’s there will be great wealth. If the 
boy’s Rasi falls in the 5th from that of the girl 
there will be unhappiness. But if the girl’s Rasi 
falls in the 5th from that of the boy there will be 
enjoyment and prosperity. But where the Rasis 
of the boy and the girl are in the seventh houses 
mutually, then there will be health, agreement 
and happiness. If the boy’s Rasi falls in the 
Cth from the girl’s there will be loss of children; 
but if the girl’s is the 6th from the boy’s, then 
the progeny will prosper. 

The number of units for Rasi Kuta is 7, 

Exception When the Rasis are owned by one 
planet or if the lords of the two Rasis happen 
to be friends, the evil attributed above to the 
inauspicious disposition of Rasis gets cancelled. 

; ' (7) Rasyadhipathi or Graha 'Maitram : — This is 
the most important Kuta inasmuch as it deals 



so 


MUHURTHA 


■with the psychological dispositions of the. 
couple. The mental qualities of the parties and 
their affeotion for each other are admittedly of 
"vital importance to their happiness. This 
must be tested before marriage. In considering 
<3raha Maitram, the friendship or otherwise 
between the lords of the Janma Basis of the 
persons concerned is very important. Planetary 
friendships are given in .almost all astrological 
works. But still I give below a table indicating 
the relations between the different planets so 
that the reader may not have to refer to other 
books. 

PLANETARY FRIENDSHIPS etc. 

Friend Neutral Enemy 

The Sun Moon, Mars, Mercury Saturn, 

' • Jupiter Venus 

The Moon Sun, Mercury Mars, Jupiter, 

Venus Saturn 

Mars Sun, Moon, Venus, Saturn Mercury 

Jupiter 

Mercury Sun, Venus Mars, Jupiter, 

Saturn Moon 

Jupiter Sun, Moon, Saturn Mercury, 

Mars v Venus 

Venus Mercury, Saturn Mars, Jupiter Sun, 

Moon 

Saturn Mercury, Venus,, Jupiter , Sun, 

Moon, Mara 



CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS 


87 


Some suggest that iu considering the plane- 
tary relations, the temporary dispositions should 
also be taken into account. This in my humble 
opinion is uncalled for, because, the entire 
subject of adaptability hinges on the birth 
constellations and not on birth charts as a whole. 

When the lords of the Janma Rasis of the 
bride and bridegroom are friends, then Rasi 
Kuta is said to obtain in full. When one is a 
friend and the other a neutral, it is passable. 
When both are neutralr Rasi Kuta is very 
ordinary. When both are enemies, the alliance 
must be avoided. 

Exception Even when there is no friendship 
between the Janma Rasi lords of the bridegroom 
and bride, Rasi Kuta may be said to exist if 
friendship prevails between the planets owning 
the Navamsas occupied by the Moon. 

Example:— In our illustration, the Janma 
Rasi lords are Venus and Saturn. Both are 
friends. Therefore Rasi Kuta is complete. 
Supposing the bride and bridegroom are born in 
Mnkha 2 (Leo) and Satabhisha 2 ( Saturn ). 
The lords will be the Sun and Saturn respec- 
tively and they are not friends. In such a cass 



88 


MUHURTHA 


if the Navamsa relationship is considered, then 
the Moon will be in Taurus (V enus) and Capri- 
corn (Saturn) respectively. Venus and Saturn 
are friends and therefore the match is per- 
missible. One will have to be 'very careful in the 
assessment of these factors and on superficial 
grounds no horoscope should be rejected as 
unsuitable or unfortunate. 

8. Vasya Kuta:— This is important as sug- 
gesting the degree of magnetic control or 
amenability the wife oi\ husband would be able 
to exercise on the other. For Aries — Leo and 
Scorpio are amenable. For Taurus — Cancer and 
Libra ; for Gemini — Virgo ; for Cancel* — Scorpio 
and Sagittarius; for Leo — Libra; for VirgO' 
— Pisces and Gemini ; for Libra — Capricorn and 
Virgo; for Scorpio — Cancer; for Sagittarius — 
Pisces ; for Capricorn — Aries and Aquarius ; for 
Aquarius — Aries; and for Pisces — Capricorn- 
The unit of agreement is 2. 

Example:— In our * illustration, neither the 
boy’s nor the girl’s horoscope is subject to the 
control of the other. 

0. Rajjn:— This indicates the strength or 
duration of married life and therefore it merits* 



special attention.' The 27 ' constellations have- 
been grouped into five types of Rajju. 

Padarajjn : — Aswini, Aslesha, Makha, Jyeshta,. 
Moola, Bevathi. 

Kati Rajju : — Bharani, Pushyami, Pubba,. 
Anuradlia, Purvashadha, Uttarabliadra. 

Nabhi or Udararajju Krittika, Punarvasu, 
Uttara, Visakha, Uttarashadha, Purvabhadra.- 

Kantharajja Roliini, Aridra, Hasta, Swati, ‘ 
Sravana and Satabhisha. 

Siro Rajju Dbanisbta, Chitta and Mrigasira*.- 

The Jauma Nakshatras of the couple should 
not fall in the same rajju. If they fall in Sira 
( head ) husband’s death is likely; if in Kantha 
(neck) the wife may die; if in Udava (stomach) 
the children may die ; if in Kati (waist) poverty 
may ensue ; and if in Pada (foot) the couple may 
be always wandering. Hence it is desirable that 
the boy and the girl have constellations belonging 
to different Raj jus or groups. 

10. Yedha:— This means affliction. Certain 
constellations are capable of affecting or afflicting 
certain other constellations situated at particular 
distances from them. For instance, Aswini 
is said to cause Yedha to the 18th constellation 
(viz., Jyeshta) from it; Bharani to the 10th 



•90 


MUHUBTHA 


(viz., Anuradha) and so on. The following pairs 
-of constellations affect each other and therefore, 
no marriage should be brought about between 
n. boy and girl whose Janma Nakshatras belong 
to thei same pair. 

Aswini and Jyeshta; Bharani and Anu- 
radha ; Krittika and Yisakha ; Roliini and Swati ; 
Aridrn and Sravana; Punarvasu and Uttara- 
shadha; Pushyami and Purvashadha; Aslesha 
.and Moola; Makha and Revati; Pubba and 
Uttarabhadra ; Uttara and Purvabhadra ; Hasta 
.and Satabhisha; Mrigasira and Dhanislita. In 
•our example, the constellations of the couple 
(Mrigasira and Dhanishta) belong to the 
prohibited pair and hence Vedlmkuta is absent. • 

11. Yarna:— 1 This seems to signify 'the 
-degree of the spiritual or ego development of the 
marrying partners. Pisces, Scorpio and Cancer 
represent the highest development — Brahmin; 
Leo, Sagittarius and Libra indicate the second 
.grade — or Kshatriya; Aries Gemini and 
_Aquariu8 suggest the third or the Vaieyas; 
■while Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn indicate 
the last ' grade, viz., Sudra. A girl belonging 
-to a higher grade of spiritual development 
-should not ho mated to a hoy of lesser^ 


SIGNIFICANCE OF NADI 


91' 


‘development. Tlie . vice-versa or both be- 
longing to the same grade or degree is allowed. 

The unit of agreement is 1. 

12. Nadi Kuta This is the most important 
and at the same time the most significant Kuta. 
In Sanskrit Nadi means several things but in 
reference to astrology, it signifies pulse or 
nervous energy indicating the physiological 
and to a certain extent hereditary factors. The 
Hindu medical works enumerate three Nadia or 
humours, viz., Vatha (wind), Pitlia (bile) and 
Sleshma (Phlegm). A boy with a predominently 
windy or phlegmatic or bilious constitution 
should not many a girl of the same type. The 
girl should belong to a different’ temperament. 
The three Nadis are ruled by the different 
constellations as follows : — 


Yatfaa 

Pittha 

Slesh ma- 

Aswini 

Bharani 

Krittika 

Aridra 

Mrigasira 

Rohini 

Punarvasu 

Pusliyami 

Aslesha 

TJttnra 

Pubba 

Maltha 

Hast a 

Chitta 

Swafci 

Jyeshta 

Anuradha 

Yi saklia 



92 


MUHURTHA 


Yatha Pittha Sleshma 

Moola Pnrvashadha Uttarashadha 

- Satabhisha Dhanishta Sravana 

Purvabliadra Uttarabliadra Revathi 

If the constellation of the boy and girl fall 
in different lines, then agreement between the 
couple will be good. Under no circumstances 
should they fall in the middle. Stars of the 
couple may fall in the first and last line 
under certain circumstances. 

If Nadikuta is not present on the basis of 
tbe Nakshatras, then the same may be reckoned 
taking into account the Nakshatra Fadas. Thus the 
different quarters will be governed by the three 
humours (Nadis) thus: 

As-wini 1 Aswini 2 Aswini 3 

Bharani 2 Bharani 1 Aswini 4 

Bharani 3 Bharani 4 Krittika 1 - 

Kritfcika 4 Krittika 3 Krittika 2 

Rohini 1 Rohini 2 Rohini 3 

Beginning from Aswini I, the counting 
should be done forwards and backwards in 
_ threes as given above. 

The unit ascribed for this Kuta is 8. 

In the example considered above, both the' 
constellations fall in the middle line and henco 
Nadi Kuta is completely absent. . 


SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS 


93 


Special Considerations 

We have dealt with above, fairly exhaus- 
tively the question of marriage adaptability and 
the importance of the various Katas or physio- 
logical and psychological junctions in the 
human body and how a consideration of each 
Kuta would enable us to appreciate the 
harmony or discord likely to prevail between the 
intending marriage partners. 

We shall now give certain contingencies 
arising by virtue of common Janma Rasi, 
common birth star and the absence of certain 
Kutas. 

(1) The absence of Stree Deergha (vide page 
51) may be ignored if Rasikuta and Gralia Maitri 
arc present. 

(2) Though Graha Maitri is by far the most 
important, it need not be considered if the 
couple have their Janma Rasis disposed in one 
and seven from each other. 

(3) Raj julcuta need not be considered in case 
Gralia , Maitri, Rasi, Dina and Mahendm Kutas 
arc present. 

(4) The evil due to Nadi Kuta can be 
ignored subject to tlic following conditions (a) 
The Rasi mul Raj ju kuta prevail, (b) Tlio same 
planet is lord of the danina Rasis of both the 



98 


MUHURTHA 


there are several elements of much more 
importance than kuja dosha. And the evil 
influences accruing from the had position of 
Mars is only one of the several elements. k 

It is unfortunate that throughout S. India 
especially in the Tamil areas, much is made 
of the so called kuja do sham and this 
bugbear has been the means of destroj’iug the 
happiness of many families b y preventing 
marriages otherwise very eligible and anxiously 
wished for. So far as our humble experience 
goes it is only in the kerala sastra that 
mention is made of Kuja Dosha. The stanza • 
runs thus: dhane vyayecha pathale jamitre 

CHASHTAME KUJA STRINAM BHARTHRU VINASAMCHA 

bharthrunam strivinasanam. This means : — 
“ If Mars is in 'the 2nd, 12th, 4th, 7th, and 8th 
houses in the' horoscope of the female, the 
death of husband, will occur; similar situation 
in the husband’s ‘horoscope causes the death 
of wife. ” 

The Lagna represents body, the Moon 
mind and Venus sexual* relations. Therefore 
the houses have to be reckoned .with refern ce to 
all the three, viz., Lagna, Moon and Venus. 
The Dosha ( evil ) is considered weak when it 



ANTIDOTES FOR KUJA DOSHA 


99 


exists from Lagna, a little stronger from Moon 
and still more powerful from Venus. 

The second house signifies family; the 
twelfth represents comforts and pleasures of 
bed. The fourth rules sukha or happiness. 
The 7th indicates husband and 8th represents 
longevity of the wife or husband. Hence the 
position of Mare in these houses is supposed 
to produce this peculiar dosharn or evil. If 
Kuja Dosharn obtains in the horoscopes of 
both the bride and bridegroom the dosharn 
gets cancelled. There are of course many good 
combinations which assure • marital felicity 
and much importance need not be given to 
Kuja Doslmm. 

Granting that Kuja Dosharn is a factor 
whose occurrence should not be ignored, 
there are antidotes which are not generally 
known to the rnuk and file of Hindu astrologers. 
The exceptions are: — Mars in the 2nd is bad 
provided such second house is any other than 
Gemini and Virgo; in the 12th the dosha is 
produced when such 12th house is any other 
than Taurus and Libra; in tlic 4tli house 
Mars causes dosha provided the house falls i” 
any sign other than Aries and Scorpio ; w- 



100 


2IUHUBTHA 


the 7th is other than Capricorn and Cancer, 
the dosha is given rise to; and Mars gives 
bad effects in the 8th, provided the 8th is any 
other than Sagittarius and Pisces. In Aquarius 
and Leo, Mars produces no dosha whatsoever. 
The dosha is counteracted by the conjunction 
of Mars and Jupiter or Mars and the 
Moon. 

Thus it will be seen that Kuja Dosha 
does not deserve that consideration which is 
now being paid to it. In the consideration 
of marriage adaptability there are various 
other factors which should be carefully 
examined. “ N 

We have dealt above fairly exhaustively 
with the question of marriage adaptability 
and have tried to avoid controversial issues 
as the book N is intended for the common man 
who wishes to take advantage of the astrological 
rules to his benefit. 

Electing a Tims for Marriage 

Ordinarily almost every Indian Panchnng 
gives important dates and times for celebrating 
marriages. The reader cannot rely on them 
ns most of the dates given would not be free 
from important flaws. Moreover, the marriage 



TIME FOR MARRIAGE 


101 


dates selected •would generally be in accordance 
with local usages. For instance, a Tamilian 
would not mind marriage being performed in the 
lunar month of Ashadha (provided the Sun has 
not entered Cancer). But strong objection is 
taken to this by people living in Andhra and 
Karnataka. Apart from this, _ there is universal 
agreement all over India as regards the time, 
week-day, constellation and planetary posi- 
tions to be obtained at the time of marriage. 

I am giving below the most standard 
methods employed by scholars, warranted by 
experience and sanctioned by the ancient sages. 

The Lunar months of Magha, Phalguna, 
Vaisakha and Jyeshta are good. Kartika and 
Margasira are ordinary. The rest have to be 
rejected. Some sages opine that marriages can 
be celebrated in Pushya and Chaitra provided 
the Sun is in Capricorn and Aries respectively. 

The following lunar daj’s, viz., from the 
lltli day (dark half) to New Moon, Biktha Thi- 
this, 8th, 12th, and Gth, should be rejected. 
The best lunar days are the 2nd, 3rd, 5tli, 7th, 
10th, 11th and 1.3th (of the bright half). 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
arc the best. Sunday and Saturday arc 



■ 102 


MTJHCRTHA 


middling. And Tuesday should be invariably 
rejected. 

The best asterisms are Rohini, Mrigasira, 
Makha, Uttara, Hasta, Swathi, Anuradha, 
Moola, Uttarashadha, Uttarabhadra and Revati. 
The first quarter of Makha and Moola and the' 
last quarter of Revati are inauspicious and they 
should be rejected. Constellations not men- 
tioned here are unsuitable and they should be 
avoided. * 

The following yogas should be rejected: 
Vyatipata.vDhruva, Mrityu, Ganda, Vajra, Sula, 
Vishlcambha, Atiganda, Yyaghata, and Parigha. 

Vishtikarana must invariably be discarded. 

Among the zodiacal signs Gemini, Virgo 
and Libra are the best. Taurus, Cancer, Leo, 
Sagittarius and Aquarius are middling. The 
rest are inauspicious. 

In the election of a Muhurtha for marriage, 
as many of the 21 doshas (already mentioned) 
as possible should be avoided. The most 
important considerations however are: (a) The 
' 7th house must be unoccupied by any planet, 
(b) Mars should not be in the 8th, (c) 
Venus should not be in the Cth, ( d ) the Iagna 
should not be hemmed in between malefics, 



SPECIAL COMBINATIONS 


103 


<e) Malefics should not occupy lagna, and 
(f) the Moon in the election chart should 
have no association with any other planet. 

Apart from the above, the usual Tarabala, 
Panehaka, etc., should be looked into. Elsewhere 
Are given certain special combinations 
which are supposed t o neutralise adverse 
influences. As far as possible, such combi- 
nations should be applied to secure a really 
propitious moment. Jupiter, Mercury or Venus 
in Lagna, malefics in the 3rd or 11th would 
constitute a formidable force in rendering the 
lagna strong. The following are some of the 
special combinations which' are supposed to 
fortify the marriage election chart. 

(1 ) Jupiter in the ascendant, Venus in the 
8th and the Sun in the 11th — Mahendra Yoga. 

(‘2 ) Venus in Lagna, Jupiter in the 10th 
and the Sun and Mercury in the 11th — Vishnu 
Priya Yoga. 

(3) Venus in the 2nd, Jupiter in the 12th, 
the Sun in the 8th and Saturn in the 6th — 
Sreenatlia Yoga. 

(4) Venus in Lagna, Jupiter in the 4th, 
Mercury in the 2nd and Saturn in the 11th—' 
Samudra. 



104 


MUIIURTHA 


(5) Mercury, Jupiter and Venus in Lagna — 
Vijaya Yoga. 

(6) Venus and Jupiter in lagna elevated 
or otherwise strong — Jay a Yoga. 

(7) Saturn in the 3rd, Jupiter in the Gfcli, 
the Sun in the 10th and Mars in the 11th — 
Pusliya Yoga. 

(8) Mars in the 3rd, Saturn in the 6th r 
Venus in the 9th, Jupiter in the 12th — Mahari- 
shi Yoga. 

(9) Venus in lagna, Jupiter in the 11th — 
Ardhaiua. 

Thus it will be seen that the Hindus have 
devised an astrological means of judging 
marriage compatibility whereby the relations 
between the couple may stand the strain of 
maladjustment. If astrological advices are 
properly heeded to there will be fewer tragedies' 
than at present and less marital infidelity. 
Modern sexologists and sociologists will do well 
to study the theory behind the astrological rules 
bearing on marriage casting off their prejudices 
instead of oriticising and condemning the 
system. 



CHAPTER X 


ELECTIONS CONCERNING GENERAL MATTERS 

In this chapter, I propose to deal with suclr 
elections as have a bearing on the personal life 
of an individual. For instance, one has to buy 
or sell shares, buy or wear new clothes, etc- 
Auspicious times are to be fixed for all such 
important daily activities. 

Wearing New Clothes : — A s w i n i , R o li i n i 
Punarvasu, Pushyami, Uttara, Hasta, Cliitta r 
Swati, Visakha, Dhanishta and Revati are the' 
best. Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and 
Friday are good. Sunday is middling. Tuesday* 
and Saturday are inauspicious. The 4th, 9th r 
14tli lunar days and New Moon Day should be* 
avoided. The Moon should be as far as possible- 
in good aspect to the Sun. 

Forming a Library Mercury should be in 
exaltation or occupy the lagna. Thursday is the- 
best. . Fortify lagna by placing a malefic in 
the 11th. 

Employing 8eryants:— Avoid Tuesdays and* 
Saturdays. Look to the strength of the 11th? 
house lord. Saturn must be in the lltb free-' 
from the aspect of Mars or Raliu. 



MUHURTHA 


106 

Make the lord of the sixth occupy the lltli 
•find as far as possible, choose a fixed sign. 
AfHictious to Mercury should also be avoided as 
they bring about theft in the house. 

8haying : — There 'are certain people who 
seem to be under the delusion that the ancients 
were a set of fools and that their observations 
■of phenomena — in their various aspects — do 
not merit the attention of the modern scientist. 
Most of the modern scientific discoveries 
had been anticipated by the ancients. Posses- 
-sing a splendid language whioh stands unrival- 
led even to this day in its powers of expression 
.and brevity,' they employed Sanskrit words 
which embodied their scientific discoveries 
unmistakably. Intellectual prejudices go a 
great deal to warp the judgment of even the 
greatest men and modern scientific men have 
•entirely fallen into this inviting snare. The 
hair-splitting philosophers of the East, says the 
intellectual upstart of the modern day, do not 
•deserve the slightest consideration for -their 
•scientific knowledge. The means by -which the 
ancient Maharshis pursued their intellectual 
studies are not well known to us, but the frag- 
ments of literary and scientific works left to \\s 
by the Bishis have their own intrinsic value. ' 


SEATING AND ELECTRICITY 


107 


In the article entitled “Moon and Terres- 
trial Life ”, published in the April 1948 issue of 
THE ASTROLOGICAL MAGAZINE, Ml*. M. Y. Rama- 
krishnan has shown the periodicity existing 
"between certain happenings on terrestrial life 
and the lunar movements. The following 
sentences which I am extracting from the article 
in question are significant. “Persons who wish 
their hair to grow dense and long should cut it 
in the first half of the Moon. Nails should be 
■cut at the waxing to give them a good chance of 
growing.” Compare this witli the principles 
given in Mulmrtha works especially regarding 
the injunctions pertaining to shaving. People 
seem to laugh at the idea when astrologers tell 
them that they should have this operation on 
particular days at particular times. The science 
■of electricity was perfectly known to the anci- 
ents and it was the late Prof. B. Suryanarain 
Rao that was responsible for bringing into light 
this important fact. The human body is a 
bundle of electrical currents and the hairs and 
nails are channels through which this electricity 
is discharged. "With a view to concentrate and 
preserve all good energies in man and to dissi- 
pate and get rid of all evil forces in the human 
body, the Maliarshis have laid down certain 


108 


MUHURTHA 


rules, which when studied by themselves look 
quite arbitrary and meaningless, but which 
when carefully examined in the light of conserv- 
ation of energy-principle look most wonderful 
and striking with regard to the knowledge 
possessed by them in physical sciences. 

According to Malmrislii Vatsyayana akshi 
(ej’es), vaksha ( chest ), kukshi ( stomach ), sira 
(head), hridi (heart), hastam (hands), upatsu 
(feminine sexual organ), nabhi (navel), medhra 
(male sexual organ), adhobhaga nalayaha (lower 
intestines), buddhisthane (seat of intelligence 
or brain ) and brahmadande ( the seat of the 
ray of'the Brahma) are all seats of electricity- 
Hence the cutting of hair from the head means 
so much loss of vitality to the body. On 
certain lunar days owing to the nature of the 
electrical energies coming from the Moon — such 
loss of vitality from the body can be neutralised- 
Hence' the injunction that shaving should be 
had recourse to only at such times as would 
minimise or neutralise the flow of electric 
currents from these sources. 

If a man shaves after food, he commits a 
great blunder as his electrical currents, which 
are about to be discharged 'by the digestion of 


CONSERVATION’ OF ENERGY 


109 


food are harmfully interfered with, and as a 
natural consequence he suffers later on in life. 
■Shaving means cutting off hair from some 
part of the head and face and this again means 
loss of electricity which is so very essential 
for the proper upkeep of the physical and mental 
faculties of an individual. 

People inclined towards the practice of 
spiritual precepts generally grow beards. The 
idea is to avoid waste of energy. Eye defects, 
loss of memory, loss of sight, deafness 
and other injurious consequences are 
directly traceable to promiscuous shaving 
without reference to day or time and many 
physical ills of man may be minimised by 
legulating “ Shaving ” in the light of astrological 
principles. 

* Shaving may be had in the constellations 
of Pushya, Punarvasu, Rcvati, Hasta, Sravana, 
Dhanista, Mrignsira, Aswini, Chitta, Jyeshta, 
Satabliislia and Swati. 4th, Gth and 14th lunar 
days as also New Moon and Full Moon days 
arc not desirable. Similar considerations have 
held good in the matter of death and birth 
pollution and solar and lunar eclipses. Tho 
ancients studied sciences and laid clown strict , 



110 


MUHURTHA 


injunotions so that humanity may be benefited. 
They (lid not believe in simply cataloguing 
facts us we in modern times do. These may be 
sour grapes for those who are blinded by thick 
prejudices but tliey are sweet for those who have 
a clear mental vision and who wish to ecouomise- 
tlie waste of spiritual energy for their own ulti- 
mate good. 

Catting Nails:— Avoid Fridays and Satur- 
days — the 8th, 9th, 14th lunar days as well 
as New and Full Moon days. .Cutting nails 
means disoharge of electricity from the human 
body and one should be careful to see that 
the reaction on the human body is not 
adverse. 

Baying Utensils, etc. Place Jupiter in good 
aspect to the Moon while buying brass vessels ; 
to Mars w'hen buying vessels of copper; to 
Saturn if of steel and iron ; to nscendaut if of 
silver. Avoid the asterisms of Aslesha, Moola 
and Jyeslita. For buying tools, similarly 
avoid the 8th and 9th lunar days and New 
Moon. 

Bnying Jewellery The Sun and the Moon 
should be well situated and aspected. As 



BORROWING AND BUYING 


111 


usual unfavourable lunar days and asterisms 
should be avoided. 

Lending Money One should nob lend money 
on days ruled by Krittika, Makha, Moola, 
Satabhisha, Uttara, Punarvasu or one’s 
Jamnanaksliatm day. One should tty to receive 
money on these days. Tuesdays and Fridays 
are also inauspicious. Never lend money 
on a New Moon Day happening to be 
Saturday. The lords of the ascendant and the 
7th should be harmoniously disposed. The 
Moon’s situation in Scorpio is bad for the 
lender. 

Borrowing Money Do not borrow money on 
days tilled by Krittika, Moola, Punarvasu, 
Dhanishta and Janma Nakshatva. - Moon's 
conjunction with Mars and Saturn should bo 
avoided as otherwise there will be quarrels 
and .litigation. If the mouey is intended for 
quick use on domestic or personal matters, the 
Moon should be in good aspect to the ascendant. 
If the borrowed money is to bo spent on busi- 
ness, the Moon must be in u favourable 
situation with regard to Mercury and lord of 
lagna. For any election, purity of the lunar 
day, week-day and constellation and Tarabala 



112 


MUinjRTIIA 


iire essential and further considerations come 
in only later on. 

Buying for Business Thursday, the 10th lunar 
day and the constellation of Pushyami are the 
best. Tuesday should be completely rejected. 
Saturday is passable. Mercury, the 2nd lord 
iind the 2nd house should all he fortified. Avoid 
buying for trade when Mercury is afflicted by 
Mars as this will destroy stocks and cause dis- 
cord and wrangling. Mercury and Jupiter in 
conjunction in lagna or in mutual aspects would 
be highly propitious. 

Buying Cattle : — Monday, Tuesday, Wednes- 
day and Saturday are good. The lord of the 
day in question should occupy the rising sign 
at the time of transaction. To buy aheep the pro- 
pitious time is that on a Thursday ruled by 
Pushya when Aries is rising. 

Selling for Profit : — Let the Moon and Mercury 
be free from tlie conjunction or aspect of Mars. 
The Moon’s situation in Taurus, Cancer or 
Pisces would greatly help the seller. Try to 
keep Mercury in a ken dm from lagna or at least 
in good aspect to Jupiter. Tuesday should be 
avoided. Monday, Wednesday and Thursday 
are the best. While Friday is unpropitious, 
Saturday is middling. 



PLEDGINg ARTICLES 


113 


Shifting from place to place More details are 
given in Chapter XIII. If one is to remove 
urgently from one place to another, Janmanak- 
shatra should be avoided. Anuradha, Mrigasira 
and Hastha are the best. Journey on the 9th 
lunar day is highly condemned. Yet in cases of 
urgency, one can move at a propitious moment. 
If you desire pecuniary gain conform to all the 
astrological requirements suggested in Chapter 
XIV. In any case, let there be Tarabala 
and Chandrabala and let the ascendant be 
fortified. The Moon and the ascendant should 
both be in fixed signs. Jupiter or Venus 
should be in an angle preferably in the ascendant 
or the 10th. 

' Recovering Money Dne The lord of 1 a g n a 
should be strong and the election rising sign 
should not fall in the 8th or 9th from the 
radical rising sign. The lords of lagna and 
the 2nd must also he well situated. 

Pledging Articles pledged under -Visakha, 
Kritfcika ( Sadhana ), Bharani, Makha, Pubba, 
Purvashadha, Purvabhadra (Vajra), Aridra, 
Aslesha, Jyeslita and Moola (Thceshana) do 
not return. Jupiter and the Moon should be 
rantaaily well disposed, Tuesdays and Fridays 



114 


MUHUHTHA 


arc inauspicious as also lunar days declared 
generally evil. 

Making a Will:— The Moon, the lagna and 
tlic lord of the lagna should all be in fixed 
signs. The constellation of Pushyami is the 
best as also Wednesday and Thursday, 
Tuesday and Friday should be avoided. For 
the benefit of the legatee, the rising sign should 
he one of Jupiter or Venus. Let Mars and 
"rn be in the 3rd or lltli house. The 8tli 
e must also he rendered strong as otherwise 
cstator will die. 


CHAPTER XI 

ELECTIONS PERTAINING TO EDUCATION 

According to ancient sages Yidya or Education 
comprises the study of the Vedas, Vedangas, 
Mimamsa, Dliarmasastras, Medicine, Music, 
Political Sciences and Economic subjects. 
Elaborate treatises exist on all these subjects. 
In order to get proficiency In the different 
branches of knowledge, education should be 
commenced under auspicious planetary influen- 
ces. Each subject in'whioh mastery is desired 



COMMENCING EDUCATION 115 

calls for * concentration to be applied in a 
particular form with a view to tapping the intel- 
lectual resources of the particular type — latent 
"in the brain cells. Astrological consultation 
is held to facilitate such concentration as the 
moment selected for commencing the study of 
a particular subject is supposed t o tune the 
mental currents to be in harmony with the 
natural forces. 

The most beneficial constellations for 
commencing education am Mrigasira, Aridra, 
Punarvasu, • Pushya, Hastba, Chitta, Swati, 
Sravana, EHianishta and Satabliisha. Aswini 
is held by some writers to be one of the best, 
hohini, Uttara, Uttarasbadha and Revati.ar^ 
neutral. The remaining ones are to be 
rejected. - . 

> Tuesday and Saturday' should invariably 
be avoided as also Sunday. The following lunafc 
days are diighly auspicious: — 1st (of dark half), 
•2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th and 11th. ' The 4th, 
9th, 8th, 14th and New and Full Moon days 
should be avoided. 

The Lagna should not be a fixed sign. 
Common signs are the best and the moveable 
ones ordinary. . - , 



116 


MUHURTHA 


In commencing education — be it of any type 
— one should have regard to two important 
yogas given below. 

Earaswathi Yoga : — 

(a) Wednesday coinciding with Hasta, the 
rising sign at the time being Gemini or Virgo 
with the Sun, Moon and Mercury occupying the 
amsa of Mercury. 

(b) Wednesday at sunrise when Mercury is 
in deep exaltation. 

(c) Wednesday when Mercury is in Lagna 
and occupies the 3rd quarter of Hastha. 

(d) Jupiter in deep exaltation in lagna on 
days other than Saturday and Sunday. 

YIdya Yoga;— 

(a) Friday when Pisces is rising and 
Venus occupies the 27th degree .of the same sign. 

(b) Jupiter in deep exaltation and Cancer 

rising on Thursday. * • 

(c) The day and constellation being propi- 
tious, the Sun must be placed in his own Horn. 

If education were to progress satisfactorily, 
one must have due regard to the following 
considerations also. 



LEARNING DIFFERENT SUBJECTS 


117 


The forenoon and the noon are the best. 
Malefies should be disposed in the 3rd, Cth and 
11th houses. The 8th house should be clean and 
unoccupied by benefic or malefic planets. For 
starting education, Wednesday morning -would 
be the best provided the election chart is other- 
wise well-disposed and strong. 

Learning Yedas and Sastras : — Pushyami, Dha- 
nishta and Sravana are auspicious ones. Let 
Jupiter be as strong as possible. 

Learning Astrofcgy and Astronomy : — A s W i n i , 
Punarvasu, Pushyami, Hastha, Swati, Moola 
and 'Revati are good. 

Learning Grammar, Logic and Philosophy:— Rohini, 
Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Pushya, Hastha, Dhani- 
ehta and Revati are favourable constellations for 
learning Grammar while for the other subjects 
Sravana, Sathabhishn, Hastha, TJttara, Hula 
and Revati are good. The intellectual planet 
Mercury should be fortified as usual! 

Learning Medicine: — Dlianishta is the best 
constellation not only for-beginning the study of 
medicine but also for learning the use of fire 
arms. An affliction to Mars by 'Saturn should 
be avoided. Let the rising sign or Navamsa be 
that of Mars or the Sun. 



118 


. MUHURT1IA 


To Learn Music and Dancing: — Let Venus be as 
strongly placed as possible avoiding affliction by 
Ralra or Saturn, as this leads to an immoral 
career. Hastlia, Pusbyami, Dlianishta, Anura- 
dba, Jyeshta, Rcvati, Satabhisha, Uttarasba- 
dha and Uttarabhadm are the best. Harmo- 
nious aspects should exist between Jupiter and 
Venus. Place the lord of lagna in the 5th or 
9th and see that these two houses are free from 
affliction. Mercury — Venus conjunction in 
lagna would be highly propitious. 

Learning any Science:— Tile study of any science 
can be commenced either in a Saraswati Yoga or 
in a Vidya Yoga under any of the special combi- 
nations mentioned above. 

Learning a Trade:— The planet ruling the avoca- 
iion should be well disposed in regard to the 
ascendant and free from affliction. The follow- 
ing are the occupations governed by the 
different planets. 

The Sun denotes kings, members of politi- 
cal department, ministers, magistrates, lawyers 
and civil servants. The Sun favourably situa- 
ted in relation to the 10th house bestows pro- 
fessions of the above nature. -The Moon rules 
-over nurses; midwives; jewellers; dealers in 


PLANETS AND TRADES 


119 


pearls and precious metals, and also governmen- 
tal activities. Mars produces soldiers, warriors, 
carpenters, mechanics, surveyors, chemists, 
lawyers, bankers, commanders, insurance 
agents, and butchers. Mercury gives rise to 
preceptors or school masters, mathematicians, 
authors, printers, secretaries, book-sellers, 
accountants and insurance agents. Jupiter 
makes one a priest, a lawyer, a councillor, judge, 
scholar and a public man. Venus produces 
artists, musicians, actors, perfumers, jewellers, 
and wiuesellers and solicitors with a keen 
intellect. Saturn governs different lands of 
professions involving responsibility’ and 
subordination, mill hands, compositors, 
hawkers, factory coolies and scavengers. 

The planet in question may also occupy 
the 10th house aspeeted by benefics. Tuesday 
must be avoided for learning any trade. 



CHAPTER- XII' 


HOUSE BUILDING. 

The instinct to possess a house is to be 
found not only in man, the acme of creation 
but throughout the animal kingdom. The 
cells of a bee’s honey comb are models of 
economy and mathematical skill while the 
ant-hills are noted for their strength. Man 
cannot bo an exception to this primary instinct. 
Unfortunately, Man, due to pride and ignorance, 
fails to give the thought and attention due to 
factors astrological which are as important as 
the selection of a site or planning of the 
building. 

In Sanskrit, house-building goes under 
the name of Vasthu Shastra and a lot of useful 
literature composed by great sages is extant 
on this most important subject. It must be 
within the experience of a number of persons 
"that in spite of the best engineering skill 
displayed in the construction of a house, it 
would sometimes ‘be lacking what is usually 
termed the 1 charm ’ with the result the 
builder does not feel really happy at all. In 
India at least, mere external appearance r 
however attractive, does not give the owner 



DESTRUCTION OF HOUSES 


121 


tlie mental satisfaction that a man of slender 
means enjoys when the house is built in 
conformity with astrological canons. So strong 1 
is the sentiment that even the most educated 
and “ cultured " modern man would not afford to- 
take risks in laying the foundation stone or fixing" 
the door-frame or entering the house without 
reference to astrological factors. 

’ A house may look grand and attractive on 
the outside, may command and may possess all 
the appurtenances according to sanitary" 
principles. Here the external factors, which we 
shall term the morphology of a house are intact. 
But what about the internal or psychological 
factors involed. Every object in nature has the 
power of radiating cosmic force in some form or 
other. 4 The materials collected for building a- 
structure and the eominen cement of the struc- 
ture itself involve the influx and interaction of 
a senes of such invisible forces that the time 
selected should be capable of exerting forces 
harmonious to such invisible radiations. The 
ancient Maharshis had realised the importance 
of the interplay of such forces between objects 
in nature and man, though in recent times, it- 
has fallen to the lot of a Russian scientist and 



122 


MCHURTHA 


•engineer, Georges Lakliovsky to demonstrate 
its reality. 

All objects in nature, whether mineral, 
vegetable or animal are produced and destroyed 
under the influence of the solar ray and its 
various modifications. Many of the great 
buildings intended for the use of an individual, 
community or a nation, have caused ruin to 
the parties concerned. It cannot he said 
that those buildings which have inflicted loss 
or ruin to the promoters of the schemes had 
no good engineering skill bestowed o n them. 
When largo sums of money are spent on such 
undertakings, it is natural to suppose that 
the best intellects in the field of Engineering 
- had been consulted and the greatest care 
had been taken in collecting proper materials. 
If the best heads and the best materials are 
used, it is natural to suppose that the results 
would also bo most satisfactory. On the 
contrary, we find that some buildings are 
spared the ruthless hands of time, some others 
crash very soon ; sonic bring prosperity to the 
•owner while some bring about unhappiness, 
misery and ultimate destruction. It cannot 
be an accident that while some buildings arc 
.spared the ruthless hands of wild conquerors, 



ASTROLOGY A STD SUPERSTITION* 123 

others close to them or forming part and parcel 
of them, get destroyed under exceptional 
•circumstances. There must surely be some 
reason for these variations in the ups and downs 
in the life of a - building. The causes for 
these have to be searched far behind the 
■superficial strata of argument a n d ordinary 
•conception. The explnntion is to be found in 
the great works on astrology composed by 
the sages. 

If a construction is begun at a time when 
the strength of the materials is found in 
plenty — which can be ascertained by the rules of 
astrology, when the influences which work 
against the forces of cohesion, adhesion and 
chemical combination etc., are counteracted by 
zodiacal and stellar influences, when the 
magnetic currents are favourable to the union 
and permanency of the materials, it is sure to 
prosper long. 

There is an important branch of astrology 
dealing with this absorbing subject under the 
name of vastu sastra and its study. is very 
material to the securing of permanency and 
prosperity to the buildings constructed. Th< 
mysterious influence of Time (Kalapumshr . 
■well marked. It accounts^for the neg' 



124 


MUHURTHA 


care of these buildings, their dilapidation or 
freshness, their occupation by men in power or 
by owls and other birds of ill omen, their being 
covered up by mounds of earth or sand, and 
discovered after a long series of future genera' 
tions to furnish facts and evidences for civili- 
zations which have disappeared, for societies 
which have passed away and for knowledge of 
construction which was concealed in the little 
heads which planned their commencement. The 
combinations of planets at the time of com- 
mencement, the position and stiength of the 
constellation, the waning and waxing of the 
ever unsteady Moon, the rising or sinking star 
of the principal designer, and the luck of the 
party who first lays the foundation stone, have 
their own influences to exert. The animal 
magnetism of the principal man has much to do 
with the prosperity of the edifice and also his heart 
and soul with reference to the community who 
are to be profited by the construction. Is it not 
astrology and sheer superstition when a lucky 
king .or governor or president is asked to open 
an institution, to unveil a statue, to lay the 
foundation stone for large buildings, and dig out 
a bit of earth for the success of the undertaking? 
These are the legitimate works of the humblest- 



ASTROLOGY AND ENGINEERING 125 

■coolies, and if astrology has no hold, if influence 
•of luck has no place, why on earth do the most 
•enlightened nations invite the luckiest man to 
open such- proceedings ? Laying stones or dig- 
ging the earth is not the legitimate funotion of 
.any big man. On the other hand, it belongs to 
the ordinary labourer who is present on the 
spot. If the most civilised nations of the earth 
do not believe in such ' nonsense as luck and 
astrology let them not be making themselves 
fools by resorting to such stupid ceremonies. 

People are not frank. They do one thing 
and preach another. It is better that if they 
have no belief at all in the science of Astrology 
they may not enact ' “tom fooleries” on ignorant 
and superstitious humanity. 

The muhoortam refers to auspicious 
combination of various planetary influences, 
and the worship offered during such occasions 
before the work is commenced, has special 
reference to the averting of “ evils ” which may 
he in' store for the buildings under question. 

Astrology as applied to Engineering, goes 
under the special name of Vasthu Sastra and 
merits deep study and understanding by 
modern engineers. 



J.ZU 


MUJUUKTHA 


The construction of a house according to 
astrological works involves four important 
stages, viz., (1) Laying the Foundation, (2) 
Digging the well, ( 3 ) Fixing the Door Frames 
and (4) Entry into the new house. Of the 
four stages, the first and the last are very 
important and significant. 

Laying the Foundation: — It is a belief with 
the Hindus that just as Kalapurusha personifies 
Time, Yastu Purusha personifies the House. The 
Vastupurusha is said to sleep on his left with 
his head to the. East during the months of 
Bhadrapada, Aswiyuja and Kartika (August to 
October), with his head to the South during 
Margasira, Pusbya and Magha (November to 
February ), with his head to the West during 
Plialguna, Chaifcra and Vaisakha (February to 
May) and with his head to the North during 
Jyeshta, Ashadha and Sravana (May to August); 
No building should be erected on the ground 
covered by his head, his legs, his hands and 
his hack, as it will prove fatal to the father, 
wife and children respectively and cause fear 
of thieves. The most suitable section would 
he the ground covered by the stomach of Vastu- 
purusha as it gives rise to plenty and prosperity. 



IMPORTANT LUNAR MONTHS 12 T 

No .liouse-building should be commenced 
in the lunar months ‘of Jyeshta, Ashadha, 
Bliadrapada, Aswiyuja, Margasira, Pusliya and 
Phalguna as thej r connote respectively death, 
destruction, disease, quarrels and misiuider^ 
standings, loss of wealth, incendiarism and 
physical danger. The lunar months of Chaitra, 
Yaisalflia, Sravana, Kartika and Maglia are 
the best. The Sun should occupy fixed signs or 
at least moveable signs but no building work 
should be undertaken when the Sun is in 
common signs. • 

Roliini, Mrigasira, Chitta, Hastha, Jyeshta, 
Uttara, Uttarashadha and Sravana are the 
best constellations to lay the foundation. 

Swati, Pusliya, A n u r a d h a, A s w i n i , 
Satabhislia, Uttarabhadra and Revati are 
ordinary or middling while the remaining twelve 
asterisms should invariably be avoided. 

All odd thitliies (lunar days) except the 
Oth are good. Of the even thitliies the 2nd, 
6th and 10th are auspicious. Monday, 
Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are the best. 
Even Monday should be rejected when the 
Moon is waning. Sunday and Saturday are 
approved by some but in our opinion they 



128 


MUHURTHA 


should also be rejected as they connote 
-destruction of the house by fire and thieves 
respectively. 

Fixed signs are the best. Moveable signs 
should be rejected. Common signs may be 
preferred provided they are occupied by strong 
benefics. The rising sign at the time of laying 
the foundation should be highly fortified by 
the disposition of malefics in 3rd, Cth and 
11th houses and benefics in kendras and 
trines. The 8th house should be vacant and 
jn no case should it have the aspect of a 
Tnalefio planet. 

The following are some of the special 
.combinations recommended as highly propitious 
by ancient astrological writers for laying the 
foundation so that the house could last long 
and ensure happiness and prosperity to the 
owner as well as the tenant. 

Foundation is to be laid in Cancer, the 
superstructure erected in Gemini or .Virgo and 
the roofing done in Taurus or Libra. The 
house becomes fire-proof. A house built 
when Jupiter or Venus is in lagna, and the * 
Sun exaotly on the meridian or at the western 
horizon, is supposed to last for at least one 
hundred years. 



ATTRACTING MAGNETIC FORCES 


129 


"When the 10th house is occupied by the 
Moon, the 4th by Jupiter and the 11th by Mars 
and Saturn, the house will remain undestroyed 
for at least 80 yeare. 

Jupiter in lagna, Mercury in the 7th, 
Saturn in the 3rd, the Sun and Venus in the 
6th, the house will stand for a century. 

Mercury occupying lagna, Jupiter the 7th 
and the Moon the 10th indicate similar stability. 

Varahamihira suggests that after finishing 
the puja, the first foundation-stone shall be 
laid on the north-eastern comer of the site. 

Fixing the Door Frame The Hindus attach 
special significance to the fixing of door frames. 
Eyen. today the so-called educated man public- 
ly scoffing at astrology stealthily consults an 
astrologer in private, and gets an auspicious 
time for fixing door frames. Probably the door 
frames have the peculiarity of attracting the 
best electric and magnetic forces from the 
atmosphere when fixed in auspicious times — 
times at which the different planetary bodies 
would be so disposed as to concentrate the 
maximum of benefic influence. The door frame 
should always be fixed at a time when the rising 
sign is a fixed one. Rohini, Mrigasira, Uttara, 
9 



130 


MUHURTHA 


.Chitta, Auuradlia, Uttarasliadlia, Uttarabhadra 
and Bovati may bo elected. The thithi (lunar 
day), asterism, the day and the rising sign 
should all be carefully selected, for the moment 
of fixing the door frame has an important bear- 
ing upon the prosperity of the master. The 
doors etc., may be furnished on Wednesday or 
Friday ruled by any beneficial lunar day, a 
common sign and any of the following constel- 
lations, viz., Aswini, Pushya, Hastlm, Roliini, 
Uttara, UttaraBhadha and Uttarabhadra. 

The durability or duration of a dwelling 
‘house in a state' of prosperity should be deter- ' 
miined from the moment at which the foundation 
•stone is laid.. Foundations laid under the 
•following combinations assure prosperity and 
'a long life for the house to be constructed. 

(1) From the lagna, the Moon should be in 
the 10th ; Jupiter iu the 4th and Mars and 
Saturn in the llth. (2) Jupiter in Lagna, 
Mercury in the 7th, Saturn in the 3rd, the Sun i 
in the 6th and Venus in the 4th. (3) / ~ ’ ' ■' 

sign should be occupied by Venup 
'house by Mercury, any kendra by 
>he-llth by the' Sun. (4) The 
rising sign, Jupiter in the 7th pne 



UNDERCURRENTS 131 

the IOth. (5) Venus in the 10th, Jupiter in the 
5th and Mercury in Lagna — which should be a 
fixed* sign. (6) Jupiter in Lagna (fixed), Mercury 
in the 7th and the Moon in the 10th. 

Any of the above planetary positions at the 
•moment of laying the foundation will establish 
the building in prosperity for a long number of 
years. 

Jupiter in combination with Robini, Mriga- 
sira, Aslesha, Uttara, Purvashadha, Uttara- 
shada, Sravana and Uttarabhadra, on a Thursday 
forms what is known as Rajayoga and this is 
considered very fortunate for starting the 
construction of a house. 

Digging Wells The object of sinking a well 
is to get a perpetual supply of clean and healthy 
.drinking water. Varahamihira depls exhausti- 
•vely with the topic of divining the presence of 
water by reference to the growth of certain types 
of vegetation. The water falling from the 
clouds is Boaked into the earth and according 
to internal conditions, runs into different 
channels. These channels of water are what 
are called undercurrents. .The type of vegetation 
present in the soil is said to give . a clue to the 
.distance of- these undercurrents from the ground 



132 


MUHURTHA 


level. For instance, Miliira says that if one 
sees a Yetasa (calamus viminalis) plant in a 
waterless tract, one can find water by digging 
the ground at a distance of 3 cubits to the west 
of it half a purusa (about 3A feet) below the earth. 
These can he easilj’ tested by our water-diviners 
before condemning them ns antiquated or 
superstitious. Soil conditions are influenced by 
climatic factors which in their turn have 
reference to planetary radiations. Therefore 
when wells are dug under favourable planetary 
conditions, a plentiful supply of water is 
expected without much expense. 

Revati, Uttambliadra, Hasta, Anurndha, 
Makha, Sravana, Rohini aud Pushy ami are 
favourable for digging wells. The rising sign 
should be Pisces, Cancer or Capricorn. 
Aquarius and Taurus -will not give a good 
supply of water. Venus and the Moon should 
be in Kendras. If the digging operation is 
begun in the sign occupied by the Sun, delay 
will be caused on account of the presence of 
hard-rock. An abundant supply of sweet water 
is indicated when the Moon or Venus is in 
a quadrant identical with a full wateiy sign. 
Venus and Moon are wateiy planets, while 


SARCASTICAL HECKLING 


133 


Cancer, Capricorn and Pisces are ( full 
watery signs. 

Entering a New House If the house, which 
one has built is calculated to give happiness to 
the family, one must take proper astrological 
counsel in entering it under a propitious 
moment. Soon after the eventful day — the day 
on which one’s house is first occupied — if per 
chance something untoward happens, he will 
not only be heckled sarcastically by the family 
members, but his pride of possession disappears 
and he feels life not worth living though his 
sense of vanity would not allow him to own his 
short-sightedness. 

Entering new houses will be a matter of 
great importance as the results produced by 
the local magnetic and electrical currents at the 
time of the entry of the family into it, may leave 
upon its members very far-reaching influences 
for good or bad. There is no mythology or 
superstition here. All human actions are 
productive of electrical currents. 

“Vastu refers to the form of construction 
of the house, and the energies or forces called 
into existence by the arrangements made and 
the materials used in the construction. The 



134 


MUIIUUTHA 


.subtle chemical results, effected by the conjunc- 
tion of various materials, though not seen by 
the naked eye, arc still there and any evil 
tendencies they may hare, to produce danger, 
disease, or death to the occupants, must be very 
sensibly and dexterously, neutralised or 
counteracted. Therefore the astrological works 
lay down certain principles and they are 
explained in the Mantra Shastra, where the 
processes by which those evil influences are 
averted are 'detailed at great length”.* 

New houses should be entered when the 
Sun is in Uttarayana, and when Jupiter and 
Venus are strongly disposed, after necessary 
worships and Bhutabali. 

* “ The term Bhootas is generally applied 
to represent the • influences of the earth, fire, 
water, sky and air and the various compounds 
called into existence by their union. When 
special classes of * materials and life beings- 
including men and cattle — were absent .from 
a particular plot or piece of ground the 
influences of the Bhootas ( forces or energies ) 
were naturally working in their own inscrutable 
.ways”. , ' ' 

r THE ASTROLOGICAL MIRROR.— by Prof. B. Suiyanaraio Rao, 




BHUTABALI 


135 


“ But tlie advent of new forms of energies 
or forces, will certainly have their own 
influences and if the .first set of Maha-Bhootas 
are found to be inimicabie to the second set of 
forces, which are brought upon them for safety 
and prosperity, it becomes the duty of 
intelligent beings like men, to study the first 
set of physical and spiritual energies which had 
their permanent abode in them, so that the second 
set may not suffer from the “ frowns ” of the 
first sot, and thus, have the very same objects 
defeated for gaining which men spent so much 
money, time and mental labour. Bhoota Bali 
therefore will be the special sacrifices which are 
enjoined upon men to offer to the Bhootas 
(forces) in the new house before they enter 
into the same and seek, safety under its roof. ” 

The lunar months of Vaisalcha, Jyeshfcs, 
Magha and Phalguna are the best while Karthika 
and ,Margasira are neutral or middling. The 
most auspicious lunar days are the 1st of the 
dark fortnight, 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 10th and 
11th and 13th of the bright half. 

~ - Rohini, ' Mrigasira, ’TJtfcara', Ufctarashadha, r 

Chitta and Uttarabhadra are the best consteU 



13G 


MUHURTHA 


lations. Anuradba and Revati are also permissi- 
ble. The other constellations should be rejected. 

Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
are auspicious. Saturday is also recommended 
by some Muhurtha writers, but there is risk of 
frequent thefts. 

The lagna or the ascendant should be a fixed 
sign. Common signs are ordinary while mov- 
able signs should be scrupulously avoided. 
Provided, however, the Navamsa Lagna is 
Taurus, a movable sign may be selected. The 
8bh house from .the lagna should be vacant. 

Malefics should he disposed in Upacliayas, 
benefics should fortify quadrants, the Moon 
must be strongly disposed and the rising sign 
should preferably be owned by Jupiter or Venus. 
When entry into a new house is effected under 
such a combination, prosperity and long life are 
said to be conferred on the person concerned. 
Griha Pravesam done in one’s own Janma Rasi, 
Janma Naksliatra or Janma Lagna, will produce 
highly benefioial results. 

Griha Pravesam should not be done when 
the wile is in advanced pregnancy (above 6- 
months). 



STRONG COMBINATIONS 


13 T 


Buying Lands for Buildings: — The best asterisms- 
for buying a land are Aswini, Rohini, Mriga- 
sira, Punarvasu, Pusliyami, TJttara, Hasta r 
Swati, Anooradha, Uttarashadlia, Sravana r 
Dhanislita, Satabhisha and Uttarabhadra. 
*Riktha Tliithies must be scrupulously avoided. 
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Saturday 
are good. 

It would be better if the lord of the week 
day concerned occupies the lagna at the time of 
the transaction. Some ancient astrological 
works recommend Tuesday also as suitable. 
But in our humble view, Tuesday should be 
rejected. 

At the time of making the final negotiations,, 
let preferably a* fixed sign rise and let Jupiter 
occupy a kendra or thrikona. Mars should be- 
placed in the 11th house and he should not be in 
lagna. The lords of lagna and the 7th should be 
harmoniously disposed. Avoid the 11th lord in 
the 12th. 

The land can be taken possession of when 
the lagna and Navamsa are occupied by the Sun 
and Kethu. When these two planets are- 
together in lagna or navamsa, the land is suppo- 
sed to remain with the purchaser permanently. 


See appendix 



140 


MUHUJITHA 


house is strong!}' disposed. In any case, air 
auspicious lunar day, a favourable coustellation 
and a good week-dav are very necessary so that 
the object in view may be achieved. 

CHAPTER XIII 
AGRICULTURE AND FARMING 

The influence of planets on vegetation is an 
admitted fact. Frequent references appear in 
the writings of ancients and their knowledge 
gathered from observation and intuition is of 
inestimable value to us. It may be the ancients- 
realised that all manifestations of energy on 
earth of which we have knowledge are but the 
emanations of the cosmic rays. In fact accor- 
ding to Georges Lakliovsky “the concentration of 
matter and the appearance of life, both animate 
and inanimate are but manifestation of these 
rays”. Evidently the electro-magnetic forces 
radiated by the different planetar}' and stellar 
bodies have an intimate bearing on the origin- 
and development of vegetable life. Solomon 
wrote: “There is a time to plant and a time to 
pluck up that which is planted; a time to kill 
and a time to heal”. This is a sound astrological 
maxim. 



LIFE FUNCTIONS 


141 


Minerals, vegetables and animals form the 
“worldly phenomena and this is admitted even by 
“the most orthodox scientist. The interdepend- 
ence of these three upon one another is too well 
hnown to need any elaboration. Behind these 
“three grand kingdoms of nature are the agencies 
.sent out by the solar globe. Under the solar 
agencies of sunlight, heat, sound,’ magnetism, 
•electricity and other invisible agencies which are 
not yet discovered by the modern scientist but 
which were known to the ancient Maliarishis, 
minerals grow, expand and crumble down. In 
their various states these minerals help the 
construction, growth, expansion and destruction 
of vegetables. Life pervades throughout ' the 
whole universe in some form or other and all 
phenomena have life in them. Life as we 
conceive in men may be different from that 
found among the numberless animals, and then 
again among the countless varieties in the vege- 
table kingdom. Vegetables are produced by the 
minerals. Life functions are exhibited by all 
vegetation and every student of botany knows 
perfectly well that similarities exist between 
vegetable and apimal functions — physiological, 
embryological etc. Pushing on our natural law 
and analogy further the life-having vegetables 



TIME FOR PLANTING 


147 


Tomato may be planted while the Moon is 
waxing and in the sign of Cancer. Capricorn 
rising is not favourable. For the best 
results the Moon should be waxing and 
the rising sign at the time of planting 
should be Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces. Generally 
speaking, seeds planted while the lagna is 
Cancer tend towards abundance and fruitful- 
ness. When the lagna is Thula the yield .will 
be smaller and the tendency is toward larger 
size in both fruit and flower. Aries : Garlic 
may be planted with success. Taurus : Peach, 
plum, potatoes, radishes, onion sets and 
turnips. Gemini; Not favourable for any 
planting, being a barren sign. Cancer : Beans, 
cabbage, corn, cucumber, lettuce, melons, 
pumpkins, tomatos, cauliflower, water-melons t 
and cereals. Leo : Not good for any planting, 
especially bad for underground plants such as 
potato. Virgo : Flowering plants. Libra : Wheat, 
lye, barley, rice and other field crops. Scorpio : 
Garlic and onion seeds. Sagittarius: Pepper 
and other spring crops, and 'garlic. Capricorn: 
Potato, radishes, and turnips. Aquarius : All 
black cereals and grains. Pisces : Cucumbers, 
pumpkins, radishes, water-melons and carrots- 



148 


MUHURTHA 


All odd lunar days except the 9th are good. 
All even tliithies except the 2nd and 4tli should 
be avoided. 

Seeds of flower plants, and fruit- bearing 
oreepers should be sown in the asterisms of 
Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Hastlia, Chitta, Swathi, 
Anuradha and Revati. Solanum indicum grows 
under Bharani. Aswini is favourable for 
betel-nuts. Roliini .is good for trees. Sugar- 
cane grows well under Punarvasu. All 
varieties of grain thrive well under Pushya; 
Swati and Sravana favour paddy. Anuradha 
rules sesamura ; Moola is favourable for creepers 
and roots and black-grain crops thrive well 
under Satabkisba. 

Seedlings of coeoanufcs may be planted in 
Aquarius. The following extract is from an 
anoient work on Muhurfcha: 

** Paddy should be sown on Sunday when 
the Sun is in lagna; seeds of flower plants 
(aquatic) should be sown on Monday when 
the Moon is in lagna. Ragi should be sown on 
Tuesday wheif Mars is in lagna; Palmogm 
seedlings should be planted on Wednesday when 


WHEN TO CUT TREES 


149 


Mercury is in 'lagna. Seedlings of long-lived 
fruit trees should be planted on Thursday when 
Gum is in lagna. Seedlings of flower trees 
should be planted on Friday when Venus is in 
lagna. Seeds of black grains should be sown 
on Saturday noon when Saturn is in lagna. 
While, beginning all agricultural operations, see 
that the 8th house is uuocoupied. ” 

Grafting and Pruning:— Saturn should be 
favourably placed preferably in the Oth or 11th 
house. Strengthen the lagna by placing a 
benefic in a kendra and bj' rendering the 8th 
house vacant. Avoid Tuesdays and Riktha 
thithies. In all agricultural operations, the 
position of the Moon" is very important. See 
that the Moon is strong and free from affliction 
by Rahu, Kethu or Saturn. The Moon should 
be a benefic. 

Felling Trees Trees should be cut when the 
Moon is in the last quarter so that the wood 
may be strong, massive and durable. The lagna 
must be a dry sign nspected preferably by a dry 
planet. 

Reaping the Crop Bharani, Robin i, Mrigasira, 
Aridra, Pushyarai, Makha, Uttara, Hastba, 



150 


MUHURTHA 


Visakha, Anuradha, Uttarashadha and Sravana 
are favourable constellations to start reaping the 
crop. Avoid the 4th, 8th,' 9tli, 11th, 12th and 
I4th lunar days as also the New Moon. Taurus, 
Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Dhanus or Pisces should 
be rising. 

Harvesting: — This can he commenced in 
Meena Lagna on a day ruled by Bharani; 
Vrischika on a day ruled by Sravana ; Cancer 
under Visaklia. These pairs form special 
combinations and promote prosperity. 

In-Gathering of Corn:— After the harvest is 
over, the produce has to be gathered in. This 
can be advantageously done under the constel- 
lations of Bharani, Rohini', Mrigasira, Pubba, 
Aridra, Punarvasu, Pushya, Makha, XJttara, 
Hastha, Swati, Anuradha, Mula, Sravana and 
Revati. 

Saturn may be located in the 4th house. 
All lunar days except the 4th, 0th, 8th, 9tb, 
12th, 14th and New Moon are auspicious. 
Monday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday are 
good. The amsas of Moon, Jupiter, Venus and^ 
Saturn are also, auspicious. Tuesdays' and 
Sundays should be avoided. Movable signs 
must be rejected as they tend to destroy the 
grain by pests or decomposing. 



BUYING DOMESTIC ANIMALS 


151 


Taurus rising on days ruled by Maltha and 
IJttara respectively in the Junar months of 
Maglia and Pbalguna goes under the distinction 
of Dhanya Parvatha Yoga. Grain collected 
under this combination is supposed to confer 
happiness and prosperity to the person concerned. 

Buying or Selling Cows Buying or selling of 
<jows or cattle can be done under the constel- 
lations of Aswini, Punarvasu, Ptishya, Hastha, 
Swathi, Yisaklia, Jyeshta and Revati. Let pre- 
ferably Taurus be rising. Avoid Mars in the 
Stli house. 

Buying or Selling Horses Let the Moon and 
the lord of lagna be friendly. Avoid their 
Dwirdwadasa relations. It is better that the 
transaction is done when Dhanus is rising. 
Let the lagna be an airy sign if you wish to buy 
a race-horse. 

Buying Sheep Let the lagna be Meslia. Avoid 
Saturn in the 8th house. Let Aries or 
■Capricorn bo rising at the time of the transaction. 

The lagna and the (5th house should be 
strong when buying dogs or hounds. Birds 
should be purchased when the • lagna is an 
airy sign. 

Any animal may be purchased on a Thurs- 
day ruled by Ptishya when the' lagna is Mesha. 



162 


MUHURTHA 


No animal should be sold on days ruled by 
Krittika, Aridra, Makha, Aslesha, Swathi and 
Anuradha. 

Intelligent use of knowledge concerning 
planting, harvesting, breeding etc., will bring 
satisfactory results. Disregard of these astrolo- 
gical principles is no excuse for failure. 


CHAPTER XlV 
TRAVEL 

Human nature varies from the highest 
genius to the greatest ignorance. Phenomena 
occur in nature whether we notice them or not. 
Dr. Johnson said: — “Let observation with exten- 
sive view survey mankind from China to Peru 
Observing, reflective and thoughtful minds 
notice various phenomena, in their daily trans- 
actions of life which apparently seem to have -no 
immediate connection with the failures and 
successes they meet with. But when carefully 
analysed it will be found that there is some sort 
of correlation between certain invisible agencies 
and events on tlio earth. But the true causes are 
not intelligible to the ordinary minds. Suppose 
a man starts on an errand at an inauspicious 


TIME INFLUENCES 


153 - 


time and fails in his mission, the planets- 
are not to blame. They are only an index of 
events to happen. They merelj' reveal that 
influences operating when the man started 
on his mission were such as to give rise- 
to failure. That the influence of time is not- 
even or uniform needs no great explanation. 

It must be within the experience of every 
intelligent man that solar heat and light differ 
at different times due to motion of the Sum 
This is demonstrable to the ordinary senses. 
But there are invisible influences and agencies- 
which can only be grasped by higher orders of 
intelligence. The ancient sages had been able- 
to recognise these influences and how journej’e- 
undertaken at different times of a year, month 
and day would produce different kinds of 
results. 

In the modern times, travel facilities have 
no doubt been perfected ; and so far as human 
conceptions go, the traveller is provided with 
every possible facility. But because the rules 
of astrology are ignored, there have been serious- 
accidents aud appaling loss of life. Man is 
incessantly subject to the bombardment of 
different kinds ' of forces emanating from 
planets aud the interstellar spaces. The nature 



162 


MUHURTHA 


No animal should be sold on days ruled by 
Krittika, Aridra, Makha, Aslesha, Swath i and 
Anuradha. 

Intelligent use of knowledge oonccrning 
planting, harvesting, breeding etc., will bring 
satisfactory results. Disregard of these astrolo- 
gical principles is no excuse for failure. 


CHAPTER XIV 
TRAYEL 

Human nature varies from the highest 
genius to the greatest ignorance. Phenomena 
occur in nature whether we notice them or not. 
Dr. Johnson said: — “Let observation with exten- 
sive view survey mankind from China to Peru ”, 
Observing, reflective and thoughtful minds 
notice various phenomena, in their daily trans- 
actions of life which apparently seem to have no 
immediate connection with the failures and 
successes they meet with. But when carefully 
analysed it will be found that there is some sort 
of correlation between certain invisible agencies 
and events on the earth. But the true causes arc 
not intelligible to the ordinary minds. Suppose 
a mnu starts on an errand at an inauspicious 


TIME INFLUENCES 


15 ? 


time and fails in his mission, the planets 
are not to blame. They are only an index of 
events to happen. They merely reveal that 
influences operating when the man started 
on his mission were such as to give rise- 
to failure. That the influence of time is not- 
even or uniform needs no great explanation. 

It must be within the experience of every 
intelligent man that solar heat and light differ 
at different times due to motion of the Sun- 
This is demonstrable to the ordinary senses- 
But there are invisible influences and agencies- 
which can only be grasped by higher orders of 
intelligence. The ancient sages had been able* 
to recognise these influences and bow journeys 
undertaken at different times of a year, mouth 
and day would produce different kinds of 

results. ! 

In the modem times, travel facilities have 
no doubt been perfected ; and so far as human 
conceptions go, the traveller is provided with 
every possible facility. But because the rules 
of astrology are ignored, there have been serious- 
accidents and appaling loss of life. Man is- 
incessautly subject to the bombardment of 
different kinds * of forces emanating from 
planets and the interstellar spaces. The nature^ 



154 


AIUHURTHA 


of the force operating at any given moment 
depends upon tlic nature of the disposition of 
the different planets at the moment concerned. 
Hence it can safely be pointed out that a 
journey undertaken at a propitious moment 
would enable the person to consummate the 
object in view and get back safely to liis 
home. Instances of loss of life, loss of money, 
and distress and disappointments to ' the 
traveller, because the journey was undertaken 
when the planetary vibrations were inharmoni- 
ous, can he cited ad infinitum. A man Avants to go 
to a foreign country on urgent business. Here 
he must have financial success, .good health and 
a safe trip. We shall grant for argument’s 
sake that at the time of starting, he is hale and 
healthy, has plenty of money and the traA'el 
agents have arranged for him the best con- 
veyance. Naturally be may laugh at the idea 
that he should ever consult* a good time for 
beginning his trip, when everything else is so 
very satisfactoiy. The poor man must remem- 
ber that the world’s phenomena, physical and 
mental, are correlated and that the links bet- 
Aveen apparently two different and widely 
separated events, though invisible, are ■ still 
-present in the bargain and one who overlooks . 



LAWS OF NATURE 


155 


i>he currents of luck really omits important 
factors wliick may do him immense harm when he 
is least prepared to meet it. The laws of Nature, 
some visible and many invisible, are not 
■controlled by the latest inventions or discoveries 
in the physical plane alone. The late Mr. Stead 
.and 3000 men sailed on a ship that was con- 
structed on the best scientific principles but 
iceberg destroyed this Titanica with all the 
-unlucky passengers in an hour or two. Lord 
JKitchner and his 600 officers were embarked on 
■a splendid Man of War but at an unlucky hour 
and the whole crew were drowned within five 
minutes. We read in the daily press about the 
frequent occurrence of aerial, railway and 
automobile accidents resulting in the deaths of 
hundreds of innocent men, women and children. 
All these can be prevented if due attention is paid 
to the time-factor. The most enlightened nations 
and persons have suffered the greatest calamities 
by sheer pride and prejudice and neglect of 
knowledge recorded bj the intellectual giants 
of past generations. 

The ancients seem to have made a .very 
careful study of the subject of travel for various 
purposes and have framed sound astrological 
rules for the guidance of humanity. There is a 



156 


MUHURTHA 


ysafc literature extant on this subject. As usual*, 
there have also been some differences of opinion 
between some of the standard texts. I have- 
avoided all that is superficial and have confined 
myself to an elucidation of just the essential*, 
astrological principles governing travel or yatra r 

Journeys The best lunar days are the 2nd 
3rd, 5tli, 7tli, 10th, lltli and 13th. The 14th 
lunar day and Full and New Moon days should 
be avoided at any cost. 

If a journey is undertaken in the following - 
constellations, the person is supposed to return 
back early after satisfactorily completing his- 
work: Mrigasira, Aswini, Pusliya, Punarvasu* 
Hasta,' Anuradha, Sravana, Moola, Dhanishta 
and Revati. It is better that the journey is- 
commenced in the 2nd, 3rd or last quarter of 
the constellation. The first quarter may be 
avoided as far as possible. 

No journey should be undertaken on days- 
ruled by Kritfcika, Bharani, Aslesha, Visakha* 
Pubba, Purvabhadra and Aridra. Of these, the 
following nakshatras may be deemed fit for 
travelling beyond the spheres of evil influence: — 
Krittika — 13 ghaties; Bharani — 7; Maklia — 14r 
Pubba, Purvasbadka and Purvabhadra — 16? 
Swati, Aslesha and Yisakha— 14. 



DIRECTIONS FOR TRAVELLING 


157 


Iii our view, recourse to this contingency 
-could be had only when the journey is to be 
urgently undertaken and admits of no delay. 
Bharani and Krittika should be invariably 
rejected. 

Do not travel towards the East on Saturday 
aind Monday ; towards South on Thursday ; 
towards West on Sunday and Friday and 
towards North on Wednesday and Tuesday. 
Provided the journey is timed to begin beyond 
t22 ghaties on Thursday, 12 ghaties on Tuesday 
and Wednesday, 15 ghaties on Friday and 
Sunday, 8 ghaties on Saturday and Monday, 
the above restriction does not hold good. In 
our view, Tuesday must be avoided. 

Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Leo, Libra and 
Sagittarius are favourable signs for starting on 
a journey. 

Rising sign at the time of a journey being 
one’s Janma Rasi is highly favoured. But it 
should never be the sign of one’s Janma Lagna. 
Journey should not also be undertaken when 
the lagna is the 5th, 7tli or the Ofcli from one’s 
Janma Lagna. 

Let Jupiter or Venus be well placed in 
lagna at the time of Btnrting. This makes the 
journey successful. 


158 


Mtfra'RTiiA 


Ancient texts contain several other rules 
prohibiting journeys towards different directions 
when different constellations rule. There is then 
the question of Yogini, Chandra Garbha, Yatra- 
phani Chakra etc., a consideration of all of 
which would only lead to confusion. It is 
indeed very difficult to select a day thoroughly 
favourable in respect of all factors. Therefore, 
readers would do well to restrict the choice of & 
day to considerations already set forth above. 
It must bo noted that strict, adherence to the 
astrological rules is impossible at times of 
emergency. Supposing a friend or relative is 
seriously ill and he is to be visited. There is no 
question of finding an auspicious date and time. 
The best thing to do is to begin the journey at 
the most auspicious hora of the day. If one is 
to go on a pilgrimage or on a pleasure trip or ou 
business, arrangements for which could be 
made in advance, a day conforming to all astro* 
logical considerations should be fixed. The most 
essential factors to be remembered in selecting 
a suitable day for travel are (a) a good lunar day, 

( b ) a favourable constellation, (c) a well forti* 
fied lagna and (d) the absence of Panohaka 
'Dosha. If these are properly observed, that means 
all astrological precautions will have been taken. 



SPECIAL COMBINATIONS 159 1 

, Tlie following general combinations would 
be of utmost importance to the average person, 

(1) Let the Moon be strong and dignified 
at the time of starting. 

(2) Avoid days of vernal and autumnal 
equinox and the days on which the Sun enters a 
new sign every month. 

^ (3) The Moon should be in the 3rd, Gtb^ 
9th or 12th and Jupiter in a kendra from lagna. 

(4) Start when the Moon is in lagna 
fortified by the disposition of Jupiter or Venus 
in a kendra. 

(5) Jupiter strong in lagna and the Moon 
in any place other than the 8th would be a strong 
combination. 

(G) The journey will be easy and peaceful 
* if the Moon be in the 7th and Venus' and Mercury 
be in the 4tli. 

(7) Mercury in the 4th, Jupiter in the 2nd 
or 7th will neutralise all the other adverse 
.influences. 

(8) Benefics dignified in kendras or fchri- 
konas act as powerful antidotes for all evils. 

^ (9) Jupiter in lagna, malefics in Upackayas 

and Venus in any house other than the 7th 
would be an ideal combination. 



160 


5IUHURTHA 


Short Journeys Render the lagna and the 
Moon strong. If these two conditions cannot be 
fulfilled, start in the hora of the strongest planet 
keeping in view the Tarabala and Chandrabala 
factors. 

Long Journeys:— All the rules given in the 
earlier pages of this chapter are to be observed. 
Let the Moon be increasing and in a favourable 
situation so that there might be no delay or 
hindrance. Pay special attoution to the eighth 
house and see that Mars is not there. Choose a 
day and time in which the Tatra lagna agrees 
with the Jamna Rasi. Avoid maJefics in the 7fch. 
If the journey is by car or train, avoid affliction 
to lagna and the 8th lord by Mars and Rahu. If 
the lagna is afflicted by Mars, there, will he 
danger of accidents; if by Rahu, there will be-' 
disappointment and disease. 

* Pilgrimage Follow the rules given in the 
earlier pages of this chapter. Let Jupiter be in 
lagna or the 9th house. Avoid the months when* 
Jupiter is combust. 

Air Journeys Tate due note of Tarabala. 
Let the lagna be an aerial sign. Avoid Mars in 
Lagna, 7th and the 8th. Let the Moon he 
waxing and as far away from Rahu as possible! 


BUSINESS JOURNEYS 


161 


Render the ascendant strong by a suitable 
disposition of Jupiter. 

Sea Yoya£e3 Pay special attention to watery 
signs. Let preferably Cancer be the lagna 
occupied by a watery planet. As usual, avoid 
Mars in lagna, the 7 th or 8 th house. Venus 
should be favourably placed. 

Business Journeys : — If you are to meet an 
influential person, let the rising sign fall in the 
10th house in the birth chart. Avoid malefics 
in lagna and the 9th. Mercury is the planet of 
trade and business. He should therefore be 
either in lagna or in the 10th or 11th but he 
should not be aspecfced by a malefic especially 
Saturn. Mercury in retrograde is also favourable 
as he will hasten the transaction to your satis- 
faction. Prosperity and success follow the Moon 
in good aspect to Mercury. If the Moon is in 
8th or 12th house, the person falls ill on the way. 
Hence see that the Moon is in a favourable 
position. See also that the 2nd lord is not 
afflicted and that he is favourably situated. In 
all these cases, mutual aspects between Mars, 
Saturn and Rahu should be invariably avoided 
as they indicate hitches and insurmountable 
obstacles. 


ii 


CHAPTER XV 


MEDICAL ELECTIONS 

Tlic influence of the planets on human 
diseases appears with such persistence in the 
writings of the ancients that it is impossible to 
ignore their testimony in any orderly survey of 
the subject. While it is doubtless true that 
some of these references rest upon a basis of 
common superstition only, it is impossible to 
deny that many others appear to be founded 
upon careful observation and recorded experience. 

The thithi and nakshatra, which are so 
important in Muhurtha, are based on the luni- 
solar movements. In the realm of astrology, the 
Moon is the sensorium, transmitter and collector 
of other planetary influences. In fact seasonal 
changes, climate, electrical storms and our 
emotional behaviour are obviously correlated 
with the phases of the Sun and the Moon. 
Crises in acute diseases are marked by the 
transiting Moon which is the minute hand on 
the clock of destiny. The most serious crisis 
day in acute diseases is on the 14th day when 
the Moon is in opposition to his place when the 
disease started. When the Moon occupies 
certain positions, he disturbs the equilibrium of 



TAKING TREATMENT 


1G3 


the patient’s vitality so much so that medicines 
administered on such days would not prove 
efficacious. Hence the need for electing a proper 
time for undergoing medical and surgical 
treatments. 

Medical Astrology is a vast science and it is 
impossible to treat in this volume all the avail- 
able information on the subject. Therefore I 
am giving such hints as would be absolutely 
necessary in the daily life of an average person. 

Beginning Treatment If one is suffering from 
a chronio disease, the treatment should begin 
under Aswini, Rohini, Mrigasira, Pnnarvasu, 
Pushya, Uttara, Uttarnsbadlm, Uttarabhadra, 
Hastn, Chitta, Swati, Anuradha, Sravana, Dha- 
nishta, Satabhisha and Revati. In respect of 
ordinary complaints such as fever, billiousncss, 
etc., no treatment would be necessary unless 
the person has fallen ill in Pubba, Purvashadha, 
Purvabhadra, Aslesha, Jyeshta, Aridra and 
Swati. Treatment is absolutely necessary when 
one takes to bed under the following combi- 
nations, viz., 

(a) Sunday coinciding with the 4th lunar 
day ruled by Aridra, Aslesha or Makha. 



1G4 


MUHURTHA 


(b) Tuesday coinciding with the Oth lunar 
day ruled by Jyoshta, Swati or Bharani, and 

(c) Saturday coinciding with the 14th 
lunar day ruled by Pubba, Purvashadlia and 
Purvabhadra. 

Similar!}’, an illness that sets in under one’s 
Janma Nakebntra or the 3rd, 6th and 7th there- 
from will cause much distress. 

In regard to long-standing diseases or re- 
current fevers, the best time for taking medicine 
is Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday 
coinciding with Hasfcha, Aswini, Chitta and 
Punarvasu respectively and especially at the 
time when the Moon, . Mercury, Jupiter and 
Venus occupy their own vargas and a movable 
Rasi or Amsa is rising. 

Persons suffering from Typhoid or enteric 
should begin treatment on a Sunday coinciding 
with the 4th, 9th or 14th lunar day not ruled 
respectively by Aridra, Bharani and Visakba. 

Any treatment commenced under Ugra 
Yogas are supposed to prove successful. Ugra 
Yogas arise when the 3rd (or 9th), 4th, 5th, Gth, 
7th, 9th, 10th, 12th (or 3rd) and 13th lunar days 
coincide respectively with Rohini, Uttara, 



MISCELLANEOUS DISEASES 


165 


Sravana, Mrigasira, Revati, Krittika, Pusliya, 
Anuradha, Krittika (or Makha) Rohini and 
Uttara. 

Treatment for Yenereal Disease : — Select a time 
when. Aries or Cancer is rising on a new Moon 
Day ruled by *Kshipram, Ugram and Chara 
constellations. 

Treatment for Rheumatism: — The 3rd, 8th and 
13th lunar days are good. Select Thursday 
ruled by Sravana, Aslesha or Aswini. 

Treatment for Gonorrhoea: — Wednesday is the 
best. Let the lunar day be the 4th, 9th or 14th 
ruled by Ksliipra, Ugra or Chara constellations. 

Treatment for Leprosy : — The rising sign 
should be Kumbha, Makara, Mesha, Sirnha or 
Vrischika. Place a powerful malefic in the 8th 
house. Select (a) Tuesday coinciding with 
Mrigasira, Chitta and Dhanishta, (b) Saturday 
ruled by Pushya, Anuradha and TJttarabhadra 
and (c) Sunday coinciding with Krittika, Uttara 
and Uttarashadha. The lunar day must be the 
4th, Gth, 8 th, 9 th or the 14th. 

Treatment for Epilepsy: — Let the lagna be a 
common sign or a movable sign occupied by 


* See Appendix. 



166 


JIOHURTHA 


the Sun and the Moon. Fixed signs should be 
avoided. 

Treatment for Consumption: — The lunar day 
must be free from Vislitikarana. The ruling 
constellation must belong to the Sadharana 
group and the Moon must be aspected by a 
retrograde planet.- 

Treatment for Ascites Tuesday is the best 
The constellation must be Bkarani, Krittika, 
Aridra, Aslesha, 1 Yisakha, Makha or Jyeskta. 

Taking purgative:— Purgatives may be taken 
on the 2nd, 6th or 12th lunar day. Any week 
day (except Tuesday) may be chosen provided 
the ruling constellation be Punarvasu, Revafci, 
Swati, or Aridra. Afternoon must be avoided. 

Taking Enemas:— Select either Saturday or 
Tuesday and avoid malefic planets in the 7th 
and 8tli houses. 

Dental Treatment:— The Ugra Yoga above refer- 
red to is quite suitable for dental treatment 
also. See that the Moon is not afflicted and 
that Chandrashtama is also avoided. 

Taking injections:— Injections may be taken on 
Saturday or Monday. Aries, Taurus, Cancer 



SURGICAL OPERATIONS 


1G7 


find Virgo are auspioious. The 8th house must 
he unoccupied. See that Mercury is free from 
affliction; as otherwise the pain will be severe 
and nervous weakness may set in. 

Surgical Operations •—'When possible, operate in 
the period of the increase of the Moon. Never 
operate at the exact time of the full Moon as 
the bodily fluids are running highest thep. Let 
not the Moon at the time of the operation, be 
in the same sign as at birth. No operation 
should be done upon the part of the body ruled 
by the sign through which the Moon is 
transiting at the time but wait a day or more 
until the Moon passes into the next sign below, 
and especially, if the Moon be in conjunction, or 
evil aspect to malefics at the time. 

All surgical operations should be commenced 
on Tuesday or Saturday when Mars is powerful, 
when the 8th house is unoccupied and when 
the ruling constellation is Aridra, Jyeslita, 
Aslesha or Moola coinciding with the 4th, 9th 
or 14th lunar day. It is very necessary to 
strengthen the house ruling the part of the 
body to be operated upon. Thus if the stomach 
is to be operated, the time selected should be 
such as to render the 5th house strong by 



168 


MUHURIHa 


benefic aspects. Mutual aspects between Mars 
and Saturn should be avoided. 

To Prepare Medicines Preparation of medi- 
cines should be commenced when the lagna is 
Ohara or Dwiswabhava. Common signs should 
be invariably rejected. The Gtli, 7th and 8th 
houses should be unoccupied. Sunday, Mon- 
day, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are good. 
Auspicious lunar days are the 1st, 6th, 8th, 4th, 
9th, 14th and 11th. 

Any panacea prepared when Saturn, Mars 
and the Sun are in lagna or in a hendra from 
lagna is said to become an effective remedy for 
all- diseases. 

Taking First Bath After Illness: — When . one 
has completely recovered from an illness of 
long duration, the first bath should be given on 
a day ruled by Aswini, Bharani, Krittika, 
Mrigasira, Aridra, Pushya, Pubba, Hastha, 
Chitta, Visakha, Moola, Purvashadha and Poor- 
vabhadra. There must be Tarabala also. 
Chandrashtamas should be avoided. Tuesday 
Wednesday and Thursday are good. The 4th, 
8th, 9th, 14th and New Moon Day should be 
avoided. 



ASTROLOGY AND PUBLIC AFFAIRS 1G9’ 

Treatment for the Nose The ascendant must 
be Cancer, Leo or Virgo. The Moon must bo 
free from * affliction. Avoid Mars or for that 
matter any malefic in the 8tli. The Sun should 
be unnspected by Saturn or Rahu. 


CHAPTER XVI 
PUBLIC MATTERS 

In this chapter is included information on 
various matters concerning public welfare. In 
the light of the present official attitude towards 
astrology, this chapter cannot be of much 
practical importance. Yet as in several public 
functions in India astrological consultations 
are not altogether done away with but resorted 
to privately, it is hoped that the principles 
given below would prove of value to those who 
are called upon to fix up suitable times for 
affairs of momentous importance to the public. 

The astrological precepts on public affairs- 
may be considered by ill-informed or half-educa- 
ted persons as ridiculous. But one who is a- 
keen student of natural laws and who knows 
the importance of Tune and its manifestations 


170 


JTOHURTHA 


•cannot fail to notice that there is much sense 
underlying these precepts, for we are only asked 
to move in harmony with laws of nature. An 
intelligent man must question himself why for 
instance a project launched at one hour proves 
ii fortunate investment while another launched at 
a different hour proves most unlucky. Some 
ventures are doomed to failure from their very 
inception inspite of all the apparent favourable 
circumstances. Consequently even those who 
make it a point to scoff at astrology- cannot help 
speaking such as “ill-starred affairs ” although 
unaware of the meaning of this expression. 
Many nation — building activities have either 
proved abortive or resulted in failure simply 
because they were started in an unlucky 
moment. 

Building and Launching Ships: — The constel- 
lations Jyeskta, Makha, Visakha, Aridra, Bokini, 
Bharani, Krittika and Asleska should be 
.'avoided. The remaining ones are auspicious. 
Sunday, Thursday and i Friday are good. Let 
the lagna bo a watery sign. Place the lord of 
lagna in the 9th or 11th house. The lord of 
Janma Rasi should be in a watery sign. Avoid 
^movable signs. Let there be no planet m 8th 
house. In building ships for war, strengthen 



LAYING TOWNS 


171 


tlie position of Mars. In building merchant 
and passenger ships, see that Mercury is digni- 
fied or at least occupies an Upaebaya sign free 
from affliction. Either Venus or Jupiter should 
be in a kendra or thrikona. The conjunction of 
Mars and Moon and Mars and Lagna or Lagna- 
dhipathi should be avoided. 

Building Towns find Cities:— The foundation 
stone should be laid at an auspicious moment 
as* per rules given in the chapter on House 
Building. The best asterisms for laying the 
foundation for building a town are Aswini* 
Chitta and Bevati. The lagna must be a fixed 
sign powerfully aspected by Jupiter. This gives 
durability and continuance. Place Mercury in 
an auspicious position. This makes the city 
grow into a big trading center. Confine Saturn 
to an Upachava. Mars should have no 
connection with the Lagna. Have the 
construction begun when the Moon is increasing 
in light. Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and 
Friday are good. Movable signs should be 
avoided. Benefio planets should be in lagna, 
the 2nd and the 9th houses. Malefics should be 
in 3rd and 11th houses. The 8th should he 
vacant as also the 12th. But a benefio in the 
12th is permissible. 



172 


MUHUIITHA 


Building Military Quarters: — The constellation 
of Ufctarabhadra is the best for beginning the 
construction of military quarters or barracks. 

Dairy Farms:—Let Taurus or Cancer be the 
rising sign. Aswini, Punarvasu, Pushya, 
Hastha, Swatki, Sravana, Dhanishta and 
Satabhiska are the best Nakshatras. The 
presence of the Moon in lagna auguiB prospe- 
rity. Monday is the best week-day. 

Electing Head of the State The best constel- 
lations are Aswini, Rohini, Mrigasira,. 
Punarvasu, Pushya, Uttara, Hastha, Anuradha,. 
Uttarashadha, Sravana, Ufctarabhadra and 
Revati. All odd lunar days (in the bright half) 
except the 9th are good. The 2nd and 10th 
lunar days are also favourable. The rising sign 
must be Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, 
Sagittarius, Aquarius or Pisces. 

Strengthen the Sun and the Moon. 
Fortify the lagna and the 10th and their lords. 
Let the 8th house be vacant. Confine xnalefics 
to Upachayas. If possible, the Sun and the 
Moon should be placed in Cancer or Leo 
preferably subject to the aspect of Jupiter. 
As usual, the Tar ab ala, Chandrabala, Panchaka. 
etc., should be carefully looked into. 



BUILDING TEMPLES 


173 


Coronation : — The foregoing rules apply to 
■coronation also. If possible let the Lagna be 
Leo occupied by the Sun and aspected by 
Jupiter. In case of democratic rule, the new 
Government may begin at a time when Kumbha 
is rising with Saturn in Lagna or in Thula 
aspccted in either case by Jupiter or Venus. 

Installing a Deity:— Building temples and 
installing Deities involve the consideration of 
very important astrological principles which an 
average student of astrology will be unable to 
understand thoroughly. Therefore, selection 
of an auspicious moment for such purposes may 
well be left to a specialist. There are compli- 
cated astronomical, astrological and religious 
rules given in original worlcs and the reader 
will do well to refer to such works as Brihat 
Samhita, Kalamrita, for greater details. Here 
I shall give just a few salient principles. 

The installation of a deity should be done 
when the Sun is in the Northern course. The 
lunar month of Magha should be avoided. 
According to Kalaprakasika, the ceremony is to 
be done when Jupiter and Venus are dignified 
and devoid of adverse influences. 

Rohini, Mrigasira, Punarvasu, Pushyami, 
TJttara, Hastha, Swati, Uttarashadha and 



174 


NUHURTHA 


Ufcfcarabhadra are good constellations for this 
purpose. All odd lunar days (except the 9th) 
inoluding the 2nd, 6th and 10th are favourable. 
The lagna must be a fixed sign. A common 
sign may be selected for a female Deity. Movable 
signs should always be rejected. The lagna 
should not be conjoined by the luminaries or 
malefics as otherwise the town concerned will be 
destro 3 r ed. No malefic should occupy the 7th. 
There should be no planet in the 8th. The 
ceremony should be avoided at the end of an 
Ayana, the end of a year, of a lunar day and of an 
asterism ; and on days on whioh halos round the 
Sun and the Moon are visible. 


CHAPTER XVII 
MISCELLANEOUS ELECTIONS 

In the foregoing Chapters elections bearing 
upon almost all human activities have been 
clearly described. In this chapter I propose to 
deal with a few more important ones bearing 
upon sports, lawsuits, prisoners and -war. 

Lotteries and Competitions Success in lotteries 
and competitions generally depends upon the 



CHAXCE-GAMES 


175 


strength of the birth horoscope in regard to the 
house of finance and the nature of the direc- 
tional influences at the time concerned. 
Therefore, much reliance cannot be placed on. the 
strength of election in regard to chance-games, 

Aswini, Bbarani, Punarvasu, Pushyami r 
Hasta, Chitta, Yisakha, Purvasliadha and Revati 
are excellent for entering into competitions. 
The 2nd, 3rd, 5th, 6th, 11th and 13th lunar days 
are good. All week-days are suitable except 
Tuesday and Saturday. Let the lagna belong 
to a benefic planet. Fortify the Moon and the 
5th and the 9th houses. Avoid the 11th lord in 
the 12th and Mars in the 8th. Saturn should 
cast no aspect either on the 2nd house or on 
the 2nd lord. 

Horse Races:— Horses are said to be governed 
by Aswini. This constellation therefore is 
fortunate for purchasing and training a horse 
for> race-purposes. Krittika, Mrigasira, Punar- 
vasu, Pushya, Uttarabhadra, Hastha, Swathi, 
Yisakha, Anuradha and Dhanishta are also good. 
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday are 
favourable. If you want to run a horse for a 
race, place Sagittarius in lagna and strengthen 
the tenth house. 


176 


MUHURTHA 


Filing Lawsuits Avoid the usual unfavour* 
able lunar days. Aswini, Rohini, Mrigasira, 
Pushya, Uttara, Hastba, Chitta, Anuradha, 
Dhanistha and Revati are good. Tuesday and 
Saturday should be avoided. Strengthen the 
lagna by placing Jupiter in a Trikona. Let 
there be no malefic in the Gth house. The lords 
of lagna and the Gth should be as far apart as 
possible. The lagna or at least the Navamsa 
must be Aries in order to assure success to the 
litigation. If benefics occupy kendras or 
occupying the male signs, have beneficial aspects, 
there will be peace between the parties. 

Seeking Escaped Prisoners Saturday, Monday 
and Tuesday are favourable week-days. Aswini, 
Rohini, Aridra, Aslesha, Pubba, Chitta, 
Visakha, Moola, Uttarashadha and Revati are 
auspicious. The lagna must be in a movable 
sign aspected or occupied by Mercury or Moon. 
The 6th lord should ocoupy the 11th and be free 
from, affliction. See that the Moon does not 
occupy the 12th in conjunction with any other 
planet. , Make the Sun weak. If possible, let 
Rahu or Kethu be posited in Lagna. 
Parivarthana or exchange of houses between 
lords of lagna and the 7th is also desirable. 



BUYING ARMS 


177 


\ 

Baying Arm:— The most favourable constel- 
lations are Punarvasu, Puskyami, Hastha, 
Ohitta, Rokini, Mrigasira, Yisakka, Anuradba, 
Jyeshta, Uttarn, Uttarashadka, Uttarabkadra, 
Revati and Aswini. # Avoid riktha thithies: 
the 4tk, 9tli and 14tk lunar days. Sunday } 
Thursday and Friday avb auspicious. Some 
works recommend Tuesday also as favourable. 
A martian sign must be rising or culminating 
and Mars must bo in a dignified position. 

Starting Wars : — Several standard works on 
Mukurtka do not specifically mention the 
constellations etc., suitable for starting wars. 
Planetary combinations for the defeat of the 
enemy are given. However, by a reference to 
relevant literature on the subject, we have been 
able to gather the following information. War 
must be started on a day ruled by Aswini, 
Bbarani, Krittika, Aridra, Aslesha, Makha, 
Pubba, Chitta, Jyeshta, Satabhisha and 
Revati. Of the lunar days, except the 4th, 
9th and 14th ( and New Moon Day ) the rest are 
said to be fortunate. Sunday, Tuesday and 
Thursday are supposed to ensure Viotory. 

• 

In our humble view, Tuesday is not 
fortunate. 


12 


178 


3IUHURTHA 


The enemy will retreat in confusion if the 
"War is begun in a Chara Lagna when the Moon 
occupies a fixed sign. The enemy is also said 
to retreat early if the lagna is Mesha, Sirnha, 
Vrishabha and Dhanus. • There should be no 
conjunction of or aspect between Mars and 
Saturn if great mortality and bloodshed are to be 
avoided. Mars should be elevated preferably in 
the 7th house or the meridian unaspected by any 
other malefic. The lagna must, as usual, be 
strong. 

Destroying Strongholds Let a fiery sign be 
rising with Mars posited in or aspecting lagna. 
A stronghold besieged under the influence of 
Aries is bound to fall early. Similarly, 
Sagittarius ascending with Mars in it would 
render the collapse of any stronghold inevitable. 

Making Peace This is an important item in 
the life of nations. Peace must be made under 
a strong influence of Jupiter. The ascending 
sign and amsa must be either Pisces or Tauims 
or Yirgo. Benefics should be strongly placed. 
Saturn must be either in the 12fch or in Upa- 
eliaya. There should be no conjunction between 
Mars and Bahu or Mars and Saturn or Bahu 
and Saturn. The signatories to the Peace 
^Treaty must themselves have horoscopes 



MAKING PEACE 


• 179 


harmoniously disposed. The constellations of 
Mrigasira, Chitta, Dhanishta, Aridra, Swati, 
Satabbisha, Anuradha and Uttarabhadra 
should be avoided, as also the.4th, 7th, 8th, 9th 
and 12th lunar days and New and Full Moon 
Days. Peace made under the following combi- 
nations is said to last for a long time. 

(1) The Moon in the 10th house, Jupiter in 
the 4th and Mars and Saturn in the 11th, 
(Mars and Saturn should not be in conjunction). 

(2) Jupiter in lagna, Mercury in the 7th, 
Saturn in the 3rd, the Sun in the Cth and 
Venus in the 4th. 

(3) Jupiter in the 5th from lagna (which 
should be Taurus), Sun in the 3rd and Mars 
in the 6th. 

(4) Mercury in lagna, Jupiter in the 7th 
and the Moon in the 10th. 

(5) Jupiter in lagna (which should be a 
fixed sign), Mercury in the 7th and the Moon 
in the 10th. 

Will our Statesmen pay heed to the astro- 
logical counsel and try these simple astrological 
rules and rid the world of perpetual threat to 
Peace ? 



180 


MUHUETHA 


The coneeit of modern progress has no 
more respect for ancient ideas than for the 
forgotten civilisations of old, even though in 
many essentials they have anticipated or 
outstripped all that we boast of. 


CHAPTER XVIII 
SUHMAfeY 

In the last seventeen chapters, we have 
been able to cover almost all the important 
aspects of Muhurtha, a branch of astrology which 
is still very popular amongst all sections of 
people not only in India but in other parts of 
the world too. 

The rationale of Muhurtha consists in 
appreciating the importance of Time-faotor in 
all human undertakings. It is an admitted fact 
that all source of life and terrestrial activities 
is the Sun. Forces emanating from this glorious 
body vary in intensity and influence as a result 
of their contact with other celestial bodies. 
Man is himself a bundle of electrical currents 
and therefore there is always a sort of interaction 
between planetary forces and those incessantly 
radiated by man. By Muhurtha is meant that 



SmtUASY 


181 


valuable moment when there is the greatest 
hannony or resonance between human and 
stellar radiations. 

Horoscopy is diagnostic. Muhurtha is 
preventive or prescriptive. It sets at naught the 
theory of absolute determinism and gives scope 
for the display of volition within reasonable 
limits. Therefore even if afflictions exist in the 
birth horoscope they can be neutralised or at 
least lessened by recourse to Muhurtha. 

Muhurtha takes into cognisance the import- 
ance of tlieradical Moon as he indicates the mind 
and all our psychological inhibitions. Hence 
almost every election is to be so timed as to have 
reference to the birth star and consequently 
to the Birth Moon. Janma Tara is the ruling 
constellation while Janma Rasi means the 
zodiacal sign occupied by the Moon at the time 
of one’s birth. 

In elcctional astrology, the panchanga, made 
up as it is of five important astrological limbs is 
■ of great significance. The Panchanga consists 
of (1) Thithi, (2) Yara, (3) Nakshatra, (4) Yoga 
and (5) Earana. 

The Thithi is the lunar day. This can be 
known thus : Subtract the longitude of the Sun 





MUHURTIIA 


from that of the Moon in degrees at a given tirao. 
Divide the remainder by 12 and the quotient 
plus one will bo the current thithi. The remainder 
when subtracted from 12 and divided by the 
diurnal motion in degrees will give in day the 
time at which the lunar day will change. Vara 
is of course the usual week-day commencing 
from Sunday and ending with Saturday. The 
Nakshatiu is the ruling constellation. This 
can bo ascertained thus: Reduce the position 
of the Moon into minutes and divide it by 800. 
The quotient represents the past nakshatra and 
the remainder as past portion of the star. Then 
we have the Yoga which maybe obtained thus: — 
Take tho position of the Sun and the Moon and 
divide it by the sum of their motions. The 
quotient as usual represents the past Yoga, 
Then wo have the last limb, viz., Karana or 
half a lunar day. There are 27 Nakshatras, 27 
Yogas and eleven Karanns. 

In Muliurtlm, the pride of place is always 
given to Xaksliatra, Vara and Thithi. The other 
two limbs whilst no doubt important in their 
own way are in actual practice of secondary value. 

lu selecting auspicious times, due notice 
mast he taken eS the purpose in view. Each 



SUMMARY 


183 


human activity requires the strengthening of a 
particular house or signification or the presence 
of a particular type of combination. 

Rasis and constellations have their negative 
periods also. Such periods should be rejected 
in all good work. Tuesday and Saturday are 
invariably bad for all auspicious work. There 
are certain exceptions for this general rule. For 
instance, Tuesday is good for surgical operations. 

The most important factors to be considered 
are the Tarabala, or strength of constellation, 
Chandiabala or lunar strength and the Panchaka 
or the strength of the siuntotal of five kinds of 
energies called into play at a particular moment. 
In all these cases there are exceptions to be 
noted. Hence in the election of a muhurtha, 
one should be very careful. Each constellation 
has it's own role to play as suitable for a certain 
type of activity. In fact Pushyami is considered 
a constellation par excellence. It could be 
employed for all purposes but not for marriage. 

There are twenty-one great evils (Alaha- 
doshas) being the resultant of the operation of 
the various forces. As many of these doshas as 
possible must be avoided. Of these Kujashtama 
and Bhrigushatka are definitely harmful for 



184 


MUHURTIIA 


marriage while the others are equally evil in 
respect of other elections. One important con- 
sideration should weigh with the Astrologer, 
viz., that the forces of good must supersede 
those of evil for an absolutely good muhurtlm 
is inconceivable. Several combinations and 
exceptions are given which would render the 
forces of evil either null and void or less harmful. 
For instance, no day of the week is blemished 
provided the lord thereof is strongly plaeecl. A 
benefic exalted in lagna would nullify all other 
adverse influences. If the kendras are fortified, 
sources of evil are considerably lessened. 

A certain week-day coinciding with a 
certain lunar day and constellation constitutes 
a special Yoga capable of generating very good 
influences. For example, Thursday identical 
with the 4th lunar day and the constellation 
Haklia gives rise to Siddha Yoga, a highly 
favourable combination. These special influ- 
ences merit the attention of a student of 
Muhurfcha. 

Of the Sliodasa Karmas (1G kinds of cere- 
monies) prescribed for the Hindu, excepting a 
few, the rest arc common to pei’sons ot all 
castes, creeds and nationalities and they are 


SUMMARY 


1 & 5 - 


therefore of universal application. Nisliekam 
or the first sexual act is astrologically very 
significant for * “ not only do the radiations 
from these stars exeroise an influence on the 
animal and human embryo but, since all sub- 
stance living or inert, is constituted of electrons- 
which are materialised radiations, the formation 
of all organic beings on earth depends directly 
on the influence of - these radiations on the 
human egg at the moment of conception 

The ancients have also hinted at the possi- 
bility of change of sex by having the ceremony 
of Pumsavana done when the foetus has- 
attained a certain' age. Of the post-natal 
ceremonies, Upanayana is very important. 
Fixing a suitable time for this ceremony is- 
indeed highly difficult. This should be left to be 
done by an expert until the student has gained 
sufficient experience which could enable him 
to do the work independently. 

In regard to marriage, the folio wring, 
suggestions may be carefully noted. 

( 1 ) Do not begin the comparison of horo- 
scopes without testing the correctness of f lie- 
castings submitted. 


* L n Grand Problem by Lakhovsky. 



m 


JIUHURTHA 


(2) Examine the longevity of the bridegroom 
and the bride. If short life is indicated either 
for the bride or for the bridegroom do not 
recommend the match unless there are 
neutralising influences in either of the 
horoscopes. 

(3) The 7th and 8th houses should be 
carefully examined. When there are many 
afflictions, carefully find out if there are neut- 
ralising influences also. Otherwise, reject the 
match. 

(4) The first condition is the inherent 
strength of the horoscope. Next in importance 
comes the question of examining marriage 
adaptability. 

(5) A girl belonging to Rakshasa Gana 
should not be married to a boy belonging to 
Manuslia or Deva Gana. The reverse condition 
is recommended. 

( C ) In examining Graha Maitram which is 
the sine quo NON of marriage stability, consider- 
ation should be had not only to the Janma Rasis 
of the couple but to the Janma Navamsa also. 
When Graha Maifcra does not exist according 
to Janma Rasi, then the latter must be consi- 
dered. * Under certain conditions (p. 93) even 
want of Graha Maitra can be ignored. All 


summary 


187 


-these have to be carefully looted into before 
pronouncing an opinion. The common *Janma 
Nakshatra factor presents many difficulties for 
a beginner in astrology. The subtle distinctions 
bearing on this consideration should be care- 
fully grasped. Then there is the question of 
Kuja Dosha about which much fuss is being 
made in this part of India. No horoscope 
should be rejected unless it has been examined 
from all astrological angles. 

(7) If the girl and the boy have their 5th 
houses considerably afllicted, then marriage 
between them is not desirable. But much of 
the evil due to these radical dispositions can 
be overcome by selecting a proper Muhurtha. 

( 8 ) * “In the beginning of your literary 
attempts in the astrological field do not be 
overconfident or hasty in having properly 
understood the principles explained here. Refer 
your knowledge to "some gentlemen who have 
much experience in these matters and whose 
opinions you ought to value and compare with 
your inferences and personal experiences. ” 

(9) In marriages, there should be no three 
or more jteshtas. The eldest son or daughter 

* THE ASTROLOGICAL MIRROR 

By Prof. B. Snryanarain Rao. 



190 


MUHURTHA 


by laying the foundation stone and entering 
the new house at propitious moments. An 
amateur astrologer should not take the respon- 
sibility of doing this job as it presupposes very 
intimate knowledge of Yastu Sastra. 

In the matter of Travel or Yatra, Krittika, 
Bkarani and the lunar days of Aslitami and 
Navami should be invariably avoided. Journeys 
are also prohibited towards different directions 
on different week-days. There are exceptions 
for such rules in cases of emergency. In selec- 
ting a suitable day for travel, a good lunar day, a 
favourable constellation and a well-fortified Iagna 
merit one’s foremost attention. For short 
journeys existence of Tarabala is enough. For 
going on pilgrimages or important errands, a 
very suitable day has to be fixed by taking due 
note of all the important astrological factors. 

The medical elections are intended to ensure 
speedy recovery from illness. There is a striking 
correspondence between the lunar movements 
and orises in certain types of disease and this 
gives a clue as to why a suitable time should be 
secured to commence treatment for long-standing 
diseases and surgical operations. Generally 
■Monday, 'Wfcdm-s&ay, Thwvsday and Friday 
coinciding with Hastha, Aswini, Chitta and 



SUMMARY 


191 


Punarvasu respectively would be highly favour- 
able to begin treatment for recurrent fevers and 
chronic diseases. The time becomes specially 
propitious if in addition to the above the Moon r 
Mercury, Jupiter and Venus occupy their own 
vargas and a movable Rasi is ascending in 
Amsa. 

Elections bearing on public matters are of 
dubious value in view of the current prejudi- 
cial official attitude entertained towards astro- 
logy. Yet as in actual practice, astrologers are 
being consulted in private for official purposes, 
the rules bearing on elections pertaining to 
public affairs are bound to be of some value. It is 
hoped the day is not far off when astrology is 
given its due by the State and recognised as 
the science par excellence for the solution of 
national and international problems. This 
expectation on our part may induce a derisive 
laugh from “ men of sobriety ” whose habit of 
thinking is confined to a limited horizon. But 
we are bold enough to say that astrology when 
properly pressed into the service of the State 
would be far more useful in preventing national 
and international complications than all the 
paraphernalia now employed by the civilised 
governments all over the world. 



192 


MCHURTHA 


The outstanding exponent of astrology in 
*20th century was the late Prof. B. Suryanarain 
Rao, a great historian, savant, linguist and 
philosopher. Prof. Rao successfully defended 
astrology against the attacks of ill-informed 
critics most of whom belonged to the so-called 
■“ educated ” classes. I conclude this work with 
the following extract from the late Professor’s 
The Astrological Mirror. 

“ To despise to hold a bright lamp in the 
darkness, indicates stupidity, while to try to 
secure it at any cost and hold the same to shed 
light on our future path really shows consum- 
mate wisdom. Choose your own lot as you 
please, and either control the planets and stand 
a victor in the struggle for existence and com- 
fort or yield to their evil influences without 
personal exertions on your part and be a 
miserable coward ” 

Om Tat Sat. 


PRINTED AT THE MIR POWER PRINTING PRESS. BANGALORE BIT' 



APPENDIX 


.Afflicted : — A planet that is aspected by or is 
associated with malefics. 

Apoklimas : — The 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th. 

Benefice : — The waxing Moon, well-associated Mer- 
cury, Jupiter and Venus. 

Conjunction: — According to Hindu Astrology, if two 
planets are in the same sign, they are said to be in 
conjunction. 

Debilitation: — Position that weakens the influence of a 
planet. All planets get debilitated in 180° from their 
exaltation points. 

' Equinox, Autumnal : — The day on which the tropical 
Sun crosses the first point of Libra. This will generally 
be 21st September. 

Equinox, Yernal:— The day on which the tropical Sun’ 
crosses the first point of Aries. This will generally be, 
21st March every year. 

Exaltation: — Positions that strengthen the influences 
of a planet. The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, 
Jupiter, Venus and Saturn respectively are exalted irt- 
Aries 10°, Taurus 3°, Capricorn 28°, Virgo 15°, Cancer, 
5°, Pisces 27° and Libra 20°. 

Fortify: — To render a zodiacal position strong by 
directing on it aspects from bcnefic planets or by positing 
benefic planets in certain angular positions. 

Houses: — -A horoscope has 12 houses comprehending 
all the important human events. The affairs under the- 
various houses are as follows: — 

1st House ; — Build, body, appearance. 

2nd House ; — Family, source of death, property, vision. 

3rd House Intelligence, brothers, sisters. 

4th House: — Vehicles, general- happiness, education, 
mother. : 



194 


MUBJjRTRA. 


5th House: — Fame, children. 

6th House Debts, diseases, misery, enemies. 

7th House : — Wife or husband, death, tact. 

8th House : — Longevity, gifts. 

9th House : — God, Guru, father, travels, piety. 

10th House : — Occupation, karma, philosophical 
knowledge. 

11th House ; — Gains. 

12th House : — Loss, moksha. 

Kala Purusha : — Time Personified. 

Karanas, Unfavourable : — V i s h t r , Chatushpada, 
Naga, Kimsthugna, and Sakuna. 

Kendras : — The 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th. 

Maharshia Great sages of India. 

MalefiC3: — The waning Moon, Mercury with evil 
planets, the Sun, Saturn and Mars. 

Moola Thrikonas : — Positions similar to exaltation: — 
The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and 
Saturn have their Mo'olathrikonas respectively as Leo, 
Taurus, Aries, Virgo, Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarius. 

Mnhurtha : — This is one of the important branches 
of predictive astrology having mainly to do with the 
election of favourable times for different human activities. 

Nakshatrae, Types of: — Yajra or Kshlpram— Bharani, 
Makha, Pubba, Purvashadha and Purvabbadra. Theeksbna 
or Ugram : — Aridra, Aslcsha, Jyeshta and Moola. Laghti-'— 
Aswini, Pushya and Hasta. RTrudhn — Mrigasira, Chitta, 
Anuradha and Revati. Sthlra: — Rohini, Uttara, Uttara- 
shada and Uttarabhadra. Chara; — Punarvasu, Swatl» 
Sravana, Dhanishta and Satabhisha. 

Nama Nakshatra, Finding: — Nama Nakshatra means 
the constellation^ due to one’s name. In the absence of 
birth data , this is very necessary. Each constellation has 
been given four letters to be taken as 1st, 2nd. 3rd, and 
4th quarters. 



appendix 


195 


1 Chu, Chay, Cho, La 

2 Le, Lu, Lay, Lo 

3 Aa, Ec. U, A 

4 O, Va, Ve, Vu 

5 Vay, Vo, Ka, Ki 

6 Ku, Kham, Jna, Cha 

7 Kay, Ko, Ha, Hi 

8 Hu, Hay, Ho, Da 

9 Dc, Du, Day, Do 

1 0 Ma, Me, Mu, May 

11 Mo; Ta, Ti, Tu 

12 Tay, To, Pa, Pi 

13 Pu, Shaw, Na, Dha 

14 Pay, Po, Ra, Ri 

15 Ru, Ray, Ro, Tha 

16 Thi, Thu, Thay, Tho 

17 Na, Ni, Nu, Nay 

18 No, Ya, Ye, Yu 

19 Yay, Yo, Ba, Bi 

20 Bu, Thha, Bha, Dha 

21 Bay, Bo, Ja, Ji 

22 Ju, Jay, Jo, Gha 

23 Ga, Gi, Gu, Gay 

24 Go, Sa, Si, Su , 

25 Say, So, Tha, Thi 

26 Thu, Syatn, Cha, Tha 

27 Thay, Tho, Cha, Chi 


form ... Aswini 

„ ... Bharani 

,, ... Krithika 

„ ‘ ... Rohini 

„ ... Mrigasira 

„ ... Aridra 

Punarvasu 

... Pushy ami 
„ ... Aslesha 

„ ... Makha 

,, ... Poobba 

„ ... Uttara 

Hasta 

„ ... Chitta 

„ ... Swati 

„ ... Visakha 

„ ... Anooradha 

„ ... Jaista 

„ ... Moola 

„ ... Poorvashada 

„ ... Uttarashada 

„ ... Sravana 

„ ... Dhanista 

,, ... Satabhisha 

,, ... Poorvabhadra 

„ ... .Uttarabhadra 

„ ..., Revati 


The nakshatra of a person is 1 known from the 
first letter of the 'name. Take for instance the name 
Rama. The first letter is Ra. In the -above table Ra 
falls in the 14th line 3rd row suggesting that the 
■constellation is Chitta 3. Take James. It falls in line 



MOHURTHA 


IOG 

22, 2nd row. The constellation’ is Sravana 2 and 
the Janma Rasi Would be Makara. In case of conjoint 
words, the first letter alone has to be taken. Thus for 
Krishna the first letter should be taken as Ka and hence 
the Nakshatra would be Mrigasira 3 ( 5th line 3rd 
row ). 

Panaparas : — The 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th. 

Planetary Aspects : — All planets aspect the 7th house 
powerfully. Sani, Guru and Kuja have special aspects 
or Visesha Drishti, viz., the 3rd and 10th, 5th and 9th, and 
4th and 8th r respectively. 

Planets J— Ravi or the Sun, Chandra or .the Moon, 
Kuja or Mars, Budha or Mercury, Guru or Jupiter, Sukra 
or Venus, 'Sani or Saturn, Rahu Or Dragon’s Head and 
Kethu or^Dragon's Tail. . t 


Planets and the Human Body 


hiesha 

‘ ,l Head 

Vrishabha 

Face 

Mithuna 

Neck 1 

Kataka 

Chest 

Simha 

Stomach 

Kanya 

Waist 

Thula 

Sexual Organ 

Vrischika 

‘‘ Belly 

Dhanus 

Thighs 

Makara 

Knees 

AfuirnSihr 


Meena 

Feet 



APPENDIX 


197 


Planets, Combustion of : — Planets situated within 
■distances mentioned below from the Sun become combust.* - 

- The Moon within 12° ' - 


Mars 

„ 17° 

Mercury 

„ 14° * 

Jupiter 

„ 11° 

Venus 

„ 10 3 * 

Saturn 

„ 15° 


Planets, Female : — The Moon and Venus. 

Planetary Houm : — This is based on the arrangement 
of the solar system as jt exists in nature. According to Surva- 
siddhanta, Saturn is the most distant planet from theJSarth. 
Next come in regular order, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, 
Mercury, the Moon and the Earth. The first hour of the 
day is governed by the lord of the day. The other hours 
follow according to the order given above. Thus on' a 
Sunday, lord of the 1st hora is the Sun; that of the 
second is Venus; third Mercury; fourth Moon; fifth 
Saturn; sixth Jupiter; seventh Mars; eighth Sun and finally 
the 24th Mercury. - The lord of the'2ath hour (the 1st 
hour on Monday) is evidently the Moon. - The following 
table will be found to be useful to students of astrology: — 


* When Mercury and Venus ere retrograde the angle will be 
one degree less. 



Sunday Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Batnrday 

Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru Sukra Sani 

Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru 

Budha Guru Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra Kuja 


198 


sruncitnu 


2 S 

- rt 5*e «, n rt 

J'c 2 . 2 ,'JJ;^ g-= 2 . 5 ,'Si 

- 2 n ’> 2 -c **5 3 ri — u *C "c — 3 

6 a = 2 c §•§•§.* *2 2 C 5 

/)C3^K W BUwD^«MB5mO 


3 £j= C — 3 rt— £j> 

■§'§^gl*5‘|'5'§^g§*a , S^-§ 

cnoUwoUicSt/JcaOwOWcScne 


rt TJ _ rt "3 _rt”0 

j= e P rt 2>c 5— a rt — c 
-o rt c ^•=>>J2'0 2 a h: ‘3 1 > -S -O rt 

a«a n B P a a •** rt a •- w ^ si 


rt d’S rt «*2 

rt •- £ £ C—3 rt -r 2 £ C a a *r 

•3* > _* T3 rt e fc* ■~i ? TJ rt c r 

3rt*53-art3?«33-Srt3 3rt 
WpiwttOe«Ot4cSwKiUtcOfcdBi 

rt rt rt 

•3 rt « *3 . - «*3 

ri c 2 —i > _*j *3 rt c b "S' > "3 rt c 

OwO»4ftJw«OwO>dpiu3«OcQ 

-H«ert^Mf5'Ot-OOOsOjMN«2jrtJO^OOOj 


20 Guru Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha 

21 Kuja Budha Guru Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra 

22 Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru Sukra Sani 

23 Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru 

24 Budha • Guru Sukra Sani Ravi Chandra Kuja 



APPENDIX 


199 


Planets, Male ' The Sun, Mars and Jupiter 
Planets, Neutral : — Mercury, Saturn. 
Radical : — Pertaining to the birth. 


Rahu Kalam : — When the sunrise is 6 a. m. Rahu 
Kalam will rule at the following times : — 


Sunday 

Monday 

Tuesday 

Wednesday 

Thursday 

Friday 

Saturday 


4-30 p. m. 

— 7-30 a. m. 
.... 3 p. m. 

.... 12 noon 

— 1-30 p. m. 
10-30 a. m. 

— 9 a. m. 


to 6 p. m. 
to 9 a. m. 
to 4-30 p. m. 
to 1-30 p. m. 
to 3 p. m. 
to 12 noon 
to 10-30 a. m. 


Bhodaaa Karmas Sixteen kinds of pre-natal and 
post-natal ceremonies which the Hindu is enjoined to 
undergo. 

Signs : — -Mesha or Aries, Vrishabba or Taurus, 
Mithuna or Gemini, Karkataka or Cancer, Simha or 
Leo, Kanya or Virgo, Thula or Libra, Vrischika or 
Scorpio, Dhanus or Sagittarius, Makara or Capricorn, 
Kumbha or Aquarius and Meena or Pisces. 


Signs, Airy : — Gemini, Libra and Aquarius. 

Signs, Blind: — Aries, Taunts, Leo are day-blind* 
Gemini, Cancer and Virgo are night-blind. 

Signs, Common Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius and 
Pisces. 

Signs, Deaf : — Libra and Scorpio cannot hear in the 
morning. Sagittarius and Capricorn become deaf :Jn the 
evening. Cancer and Virgo are deaf at midday. 



200 


MUHUnTilA 


Signs, Earthy : — Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn. 

Signs, Fiery Aries, Leo and Sagittarius 

Signs, Fixed Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius. 

Signs, Lame . — During twilight Aquarius and Pisces 
become lame 

Signs, Movable : — Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn. 

Signs, Watery : — Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces 

Thithies, Different kinds of: — Nando— the 1st, 6th 
.and 11th lunarxiays are known as Nanda Bhadra — the 2nd, 
7th and 12ch lunar days Jayat^the 3rd, 8th, and 13th 
lunar days Rikthas— The 4th, 9th and 14th lunar days. 
Poorna— -The 5th, 10th and 15th lunar days. 

Thridoshas : — According to Ayurveda health is main- 
tained by a certain equilibrium of three fundamental 
humours or doshas viz., Vatha ( wind ), Pitha ( bile ) 
and Sleshma ( phlegm ). . f . t 

Thrikonas : — The’ lst, 5th and 9th 

Upacbaya : — The 3rd, 6th/ 10th and 11th signs from 
lagna 

jYalnaslktt : — This denotes the 22nd constellation from 
•that of one's birth. It indicates destruction and should be 

avoided for all good work, 
s . - 1 . I m « it 1 J 

Yogas Bad Of the 27 yogas mentioned on page 13,’ 
•thfe following are inauspicious: — Vyaghatham,’ Parigham, 
Vajram, Vyatfifpatfiam, Vydfiritf, .tjancfam, Atfifgancfam, 
Sulam, Vishkambam. ' i . 



BIBLIOGRAPHY. 


Muhunha Chinthamani 
Muhurtha Marthanda 
Muhunha Darpana 
Muhurtha Deepika 
Kalamrita 
Uttara Kalamrita 
Prasna Marga 
Brihat Samhita 
Kala Prakasika 
Jatakadcsa Marga 
Muhurtha Pradarsini 

A Text Book of Astrology 
By Dr. A. J. Pearce 
Astrological Mirror (Big Edn.) 

By Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao 
Astrological Mirror (Pocket Edn.) 

By Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao 
An Introduction to Astrology 

By Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao 
Electional Astrology 
By V. E. Robson 

Actions of Radiations on Living Cells 
By D. E. Lea 
The Secret of Life 

By Georges Lakhovsky 
Astrology & Modern Thought 
By B. V. Raman 
Hindu Predictive Astrology 
By B. V. Raman 



INDE& 


A 

Abhijit 24, 25. 
Accountants 119 
Acidity 44 
Actors 119 
Aditi 24, 32 

Adhobhaga Nalayaha 108 
Adverse Yogas 27 
Agni 24, 29, 32 
Agnipanchaka 20, 21 
Agreeability 71 
Agriculture, see Crops 
Ahi 31 

Ahibudhya 25 
Ahirbudhnya 31 
Air 134 
Ajaikapat 25 
Ajipada 31 

Akalagarjitha Vrishti 35 
Aksharabhyasa 62, See also 
Auspicious Ceremonies 
Akshi 108 
Alcibiades 73 
Alkalinity 44 
Alphabet (Aksharabhyasa) 
62, 22 
America 70 

Amita Siddha Yoga 40 
Amnion 53 
Anabolism 47 
Andreas Sparre 49 
Animal 122, 151, see 
Buying. 

Annaprasana 59, see also 
Auspicious Ceremonies 


Anodes 46 
Anthills 120 
Anujanma 42 
Anuradha 15, 25 
Apamarga 55 
Apple 143 
Aquarius 14 
Aquatic Sign 138 
Arama 31 
Ardhama 104 
Aridra 15, 25 
Aries 14, 33 

Arms buying 177, see also 
Buying. 

Artha 68 
Artists 119 
Aryaman 25 

Ascites, treatment for 166 
Ashadha 101, 126 
Ashtakavarga of Venus in 
marriage 76. 

Ashtama X.3gna 34 
Ashtami 190. 

Aslesha 15, 25, 29, 97 . 
Aspasia 73 
Astrologer 184, 187. 
Astrology 1 
Aswi 31 
Asivini 15, 25 
Aswins 24 
Athens 73 
Athiganda 13, 29 
Atmosphere 129 
Attraction 129 
Auspicious Ceremonies and 
Works 25, 26, 28, see 



201 


mranitTHA 


also Tarabala, Chandra- 
bala, Panchaka, Maha- 
doslias, Siddha Yogas. 
Authors 119 
Autumn 144 
Ayana 174 
Ayurvedic 142 
Ayushman 13 

B 

Bacteria 142 
Banian 53 
Bankers 119 
Balava 13 

Barley 147, see Crops. 
Baptising 15, see also 
Namakarana 
Bava Karana 13, 29 
Beans 147, see Crops 
Beets, sowing 146 
Beards 109 

Beds and Cots collecting 26 
Bernard Macfadden on 
Sex 43 

Betel-nuts 148, see Crops 
Bhadra Karana 29, 39 
Bhadrapada 126 
Bhaga 24, 31 
Bharani 15, 19, 29, 24, 

26, 190 
Bhasmas 142 
Bhootas 134 
Bhrigu 94 
Bhuta Bali 134 
Bhrigu Shatka 33, 383 
Bhujanga 14 
Billiousness 163 
Bindus 76 
Biogenitic 43 
Birds 151, set Buying 


Biology 2 
Birth Star 17 
Blindness 66 
Bluhm, Prof. — His 
experiments 44 
Booksellers 119 
Borrowing 111, see 
Money 
Botany 141 
Brahma 13, 108 
Brahman 25 
Brahmananda 108 
Brahmins 63 
Brain 53 

Brass 11 0, see also 
Buying 

Bride 34, see also^Kutas 
Bridegroom 34, see also 
Kutas 

Brihaspathi 94 
Brihat Samhita 24, 173 
Buddhistana 108 
Buffalo 83, see Cattle 
Bugbear 9S 

Building cities and towns 
171, see also Auspicious 
Works 

Buildings 123, 137 
Business 111, see also 
Buying and 
Mahadoshas - 
Butchers 119 
Buying 110-112, 22, see 
also Tara Bala, 

Chandra Bala and 
Panchaka 

Buying Houses 138 
Buying Lands for 
Houses 137, 22, see 
also Auspicious Works 



INDEX 


205 


Buying Land for 
Agriculture 145 
Buying Cows 151, 

Horses 151, Sheep 151 
Dogs 151 


C 

Cabbage 147, see Crops 
Calamus Viminalis 132 
Camille Flammarion 143 
Cancer 14, 33 
Capricorn 14 
Carl Jung 8 
Carpenters 119 
Carrots, sowing 146, see 
Crops. 

Cat 82 
Cathodes 46 
Cato’s dictum 143 
Cattle, collecting fodder, 
112, 26, see also 
Buying and Karana 
Cauliflower 147, see 
Crops 
Cell 47 
Century 129 
Cereals 147, see Crops 
Chaitra 101, 6+ 

Chance 52 
Chandra 32 

Chandrabala 17, 18, 183 
Chandra Garbha 158 
Chandrashtama 37, 30 
Charaka on change of 
sex, 48, 54 

Chara Constellation 165 
Charm 120. 

Chatushpada 13 
Chemistry 44 v . 


Chemists 119 
Chitta 15, 25 
Chorapanchakam 20 
Chowlam 60, 62,' see 
also Auspicious 
Ceremonies 
Chromosomes 44 
Cicero 73 
Civil Servants 118 
Climacteric 16 
Climatic 69 
Clothes 105, tee also 
Tara Bala and 
Chandra Bala 
Cocoanuts 148, see Crops 
Co-habitation 41 
Cohesion 123 
Coitus 41 

Combust— Jupiter and 
Venus in 58, 60 
Commanders 119 
Common Janma 
Nakshatra 95 
Common Janma Rasis 
94-96 

Compatibility 69 
Competitions, success in 
174, see also Auspicious 
Works 

Compositors 119 
Conception and 
development of the 
Embryo 46, 52, 53, 

185 - 

Connubial dissatisfaction 
74 

Constellations-fixed, light, 
sharp, soft, movable, 
dreadful and mixed, 25, 
27. 



200 


muhurtha 


Constellations and their 
lords or presiding Deva- 
tas 24. 

Consumnlation 40. . 

Consumption, treatment 
for, 166 

Contingencies 93-96. 
Copper 110, see also 
Buying. 

Copulation 42 
Corn, see Crops. 
Coronation 22, 23, 173 see 
also State 

Cosmic Determinism 2 
Cosmic force 121 
Cosmic radiation 8 
Councillor 119 
Cow 82, 151, see also 
Buying and Selling. 
Cradling 59, see also Aus- 
picious Ceremonies. 
Creepers 148, see Crops. 
Critical period 16 
Crops 140-144, see Sowing 
and also Reaping 
Crops, in-gathering 150 
Crops, Harvesting 150 
Cucumbers 143,' 147, see 
Crops. 

D 

Dairy Farms 172, set also 
Building 

Dancing 25, 118. 

Danger 127. 

Darwin 47 

Davenport, findings of 44 
Daughter, birth of a, 42, 
eldest 18S.‘ 

Deafness 109 


Death 76, see Kutas 
Deceit for 26. 

Deeds evil, violent and 
cruel, 29, 26. 
Deflorations 40 
Delusion 106 
Democratic Govt. 

formation of 173 
Demitrius 74 
DentaJ, treatment 166 
Dentition 16. 

Designer 124. 

Destruction 33. 
Determinism 181. 
Destructive Constellations 
96 

Dcva Gana 79-SO 
Dhanishta 15, 25, 26. 
Dhanus 144. 

Dhanya Parvatha Yoga 

151. 

Dharma 6S. 

Dharma Sastras 114. 
Dhriti 13. 

Dhruva 13 
Dickens 74 
Digestion 10S 
Digging Wells 126, 131 
Dina Kutam 78 
Discord among couples 75 
Diseases Treatment 191, 
see also Treatment. 
Disharmony 79. 
Dismantling Buildings 139. 
Divining, water 131. 
Divorce SO 
Diurnal Muhurtha 31 
Doctor 142 
Dog 82, 151, see also 
Buying. 

Door frame, fixing 120. 



INDEX 


207 


Doshas 26, 97-100, see also 
Mahadoshas. 

Dosha Swalpa 28. 

Dual Personality 50 

Duration 131, see also 
Rajju Kuta. 

Durmuhurtha 31, 32. 

Dysgenic 69. 

E 

Ear Boring, see Kama 
Vedha. 

Eclipses 34. 

Economic subjects 114. 

Education, commencing, 
see Aksharabhyasa and 
Chapter XI. 

Ego development in 
marrying partners 90. 

Ekargala 35. 

Ekavimsati Mahadoshas 
28. 

Electional 1. 

Elections, Miscellaneous 

174-180. 

Electricity 6. 107. 

Electromagnetic 24, 140. 

Elephant 82. 

Embryo 51. 

Emergent Occasions 28. 

Empirical 2. 

Enemas, taking 166. 

Energy-principle conser- 
vation of 10S. 

Engineering 125. 

Enteric 164. 

Entry into New House 126, 
133-136, see also Auspi- 
cious Works. 

Environments 142. 


Epilepsy, treatment 165. 
Ethnological 69. 
Etymology' 49' 

European 48. 

Evils 35. 

Evolution SI, 142. 
Example on Kutas 78, SO, 
SI, 84 87, SS, 90 
Exceptions 85, S7. 

F 


Factory Coolies 119. 
Fertilisation 46. 

Fever 163, 164. 

Ficus Indica 55. 

Fig. 143. 

Fine Arts 25. 

Fire-proof 128. 

Fire, setting 26. 

First- feeding 15, 59, 22. 
Fixed Signs 14, see 
Appendix 

Fixing the Door Frame 
126, 129-131 see also 
Auspicious Works. 
Fodder 26. 

Foetus 43, 52. 

Flower Plants 146-148, 
see also Planting 
Fools 106 
Forces 5 
Fortification 38 
Foundation 25, 82, 126-129 
see also Laying. 

Friday 29, 39. 

Fruition 36. 

Fuel Collecting 26. 
Furnishing houses 130. ' 



208 


MUlIUETHA 


G 


H 


Gamble, 70 

Gana Kutam 78-80, 186 
Ganda 13, 29 
Gandanthara 33 
Garbhadhana 40 
Gardening 26 
Garga 65, 94 
Garija 13 

Garlic 147, see Crops 
Gebhard Prof. 50 
Gemini 14 
General Matters, 
Elections concerning 
105-114, 189 
Genitals 53 

Georges Lakhovsky 112 
Germs 13 
Gestation 52 
Ghati 14 

Gingilli, sowing 146 set 
also Crops 
Girisa 31 
Glands 50 

Gonorrhoea, treatment 

165 

Gotra 69 

Grains, sowing see Crops 
Grafting plants 144, 149 
Graha Maitri 81, 85-88, 
186 

Grahanothpatha 34 
Greeshma 144 
Grete 50 
Gridhra 14 
Griha Pravesam 136 
Guna Bahulya 28 
Guru 66 


Hair 107 
Halos 174 

Happiness 85, 128, see 
also Kutas 

Hard-rock while digging 
wells 132 
Hare 83 
Harshana 13 
Harvesting, see Crops 
Hastha 15, 25 
Hastam 108 
Hawkers 119 
Heal 140 
Heart 52 
Heat 141 
Herbs 143 
Heredity 68, 91 
Hesiod 143 
Hindus, 63, 68, 104 
Honey-Comb 120 
Hora 116, see Appendix 
Horoscopy 4, 181 
Horse 82, 151, see also 
Races, Buying and 
Selling. ^ 

Horse radish 143. 
House-building, repairing, 
etc., 21, 26, 120-410, 

189, see also Panchaka 
and Mahadoshas 
Hostile pairs 84 
Hridi 108 
Humours 91 
Husband and wife 
separation, discord, 
attachment, 
subservience, unhappi- 
ness etc. , 45, 75-76, 
see also Kutas 



INDEX 


209 


I 

Ignorance 96 
Ill-matched 72 
Illness 109, bath after 
168 

Immoral 118 
Impregnation 46 
Imprisonment for 25, 26 
Incantations 25 
Incendiarism 127 
India 68 
Indra 13, 25 
Indragni 25 

Industries starting of 25 
Infidelity, marital 7Q, J04 
Infra-red 142 
Inherent 19 
Inheritance 45 
Inhibitions 9 
Inimical Yonies 84 
Initiations 30 
Injections, taking 166 
Installing a Deity 183 
Insurance Agents H9 
Intellect 65, 119 
International Problems 
291, see also Public 
Interdependence 141 
Investiture of Sacred 
Thread, see Upanayana 
Investment 139 
Invoking Spirits 25 
Iron 110, see also 
Buying 

J 

Janaki 59 

Janma Na.ksha.tra.. I J, 22% 
23 

Janma Rasi 17 


Janma Tara 10, 22 
Jaya 39 
Jaya Yoga 104 
Jeeva 32 
Jeevaka 55 
Jewellers 118 
Jewellery 110, see also 
Buying 190 
Johnson Dr. 125 
Journey, see Travel 
Judge ]J9 
Junctions 93 
Jupiter 5 

Jyeshta 15, 25, 29, 97 
187 

K 

Kalaprakasika 173 
Kalapurusha 1 
Kalka 55 
Kalamrita 173 
Kama 68 
Kantharajju 89 
Karana 11, 13, 29, 82 
Karma 4 

Kama Vedha 60, see 
also Auspicious 
Ceremonies 
Kartbari Dosha 30 
Kartika 101 
Katabolism 47 
Kati Rajju 89 
Kaulava 13 

Kendra 37, see Appendix: 
Kerala Sastra 98 
Kethu 66 
Kill 140 

Kimstughna 13 
Kings 119 
Kitchner Lord 155 



XIV 


muhuktha 


Krishna 59 

Krittika 15, 29, 26, 190 
Krurasamyuta 35 
Kshatriya ego 90 
Kshana 70 

Kshipram, constellation 
- 165, see Appendix 
Kaja 75 

Kuja Dosha 97-100, 181 
Kujashtama 33, 183 
Kukshi 108 
Kumbha 34 
Kunavamsa 34 
Kutas 70, 78-94, see 
also Contingencies, 
Destructive Constel- 
lations, Kuja Dosha, 
Summary. 

L 

Lagna, its fortification 
37-38 

Lagna Thyajya 14, 36 
Lawsuits, filing 176, see 
also Auspicious Works. 
Lawyers 118 
Laying the foundation 25, 
126-129, see also 
Auspicious Works. 

Learning" 22, 114-119, set 

a'Iso Education 
Leeks 143. 

Legatee 114- 
Lending 111, see Money. 
Lettuce 147, see Crops. 
Leo 14, 33. 

Leprosy, treatment 165- 
Libra 14. 

Library Forming a 105, 
see also Maha Doshas. 


Life 147- 
Life Force 47. 

Life-having 141. 

Lifeless 142- 
Light 6. 

Lilies 143 
Lion 83. 

Litigation 111. 

Little-heads 124 
Loha 142- 

Longevity 61, see also 
Kutas 

Lotteries, see Competitions 
Luck 124. 

Lunar Mansions 12. 

Lunar Movements 107 

M 

Magha 64. 

Magistrates l]8- 
Magnetism 6. 

Maha Doshas 28-35, 183. 
Mahapatha 35. 
Maharishies 3. 

Maharishi Yoga 104- 
Mahendra 78. 

Mahendra Yoga 103. 
Makara 34. 

Makha 15, 26. 

Making a Will 114. 
Maladjustments 69, 104- 
Mammals 81- 
Manes 24. 

Mantras getting and other 
initiations, 29, 30. 
Manusha Gana 79-.80. 
Margasira 101. 

Marriaee 15. 1R. 67-104 


INDEX 


211 


Mahadoshas, Seasons in 
Andhra, Karnataka and 
Tamilnad 101, Electing 
a time 1QI-IQ4. 

Mars 60. 

Mary Powell 74. 

Masha 55. 

Mathematicians H9. 

Mathematics 2. 

Maxillary' Processes 53. 
Mechanics J19- 
Medhra 108- 

Medical Elections 162-169, 
109- 

Medicine, administration 
of 20, 25, 114, 22, 
Preparation 168- 
Meditation 30- 
Melons 147, see Crops. 
Membranes 53. 

Memory 109- 
Men 41 

Menopause 16 
Menses 41 
Menstruation 47 
Mental Currents 30 
Mercury 5. 

Mesha 18- 
Metals 142 
Metaphysics 2. 

Midwives US- 
Military Quarters, 
building 172 -W also 
Building. 

Mill-hands 119- 
Milton 74. 

Mimamsa 114 . 

Mineral 122- 
Ministers US. 

Misery 85. 

Mitra 18, 25. 31. 


Moksha 68. 

Monday 38 

Money m, 113, see also 
Tarabala, Chandrabala- 
and Panchaka. 

Mongoose 83. 

Monkey 83 
Moola 15, 25, 97. 

Moon 12, 9, 30. 

Military 44. 

Morphology 121. 

Mother 44, 97. 

Movable Signs 14, see 
Appendix. 

Mrigasira 15, 25- 
Mrityu Panchaka 20, 21- 
Muhurtha 1, 5, 31, 180, 
184.' 

Muhurtha Thathwa 94. 
Murders. 25. 

Music 25, 114. 

Mythology 133. 

N 

Nabhi 108. 

Nabhi Rajju 89. 

Nadi Kuta 78, 91-92. 

Naga 13. 

Naidhana Tara 18, 22. 
Nails Cutting 107, 110. 
Nakshatra 11, 12, 29, 182,. 

see also Constellations. 
Nakshatra Panchaka 26. 
Naktanchara 31. 
Namakarana 29,58, see 
also Auspicious 
Ceremonies. 

Nama Tara 10, 188, see 
also Appendix. 

Nanda 39 
Narada 94, 



212 


McmraTiiA 


National Problems 191 , 
see also Public 
Natural forces 135 
Nature 79 
Navami 190 
Navamsa Lagna 31 
Nefarious Schemes for 26 
Negative period 25 
Nicolai K. on Sex 45 
Niruri 25 

Nisheka 40-43, 185, 5« 
also Nuptials. 

Nocturnal Muhurtha 31 
Nonsense 125 
Nose, treatment 169 
Nuptials 19, 22, 40-43, see 
also Tarabala. Chandra- 
bala, Panchaka, Maha- 
doshas. 

Nurses 118 

0 

•Obalachari 51 
Obalamma 51 
Occupation 21 
Olive 143 
•Omen 124 
One-sexed 72 
Onion 143, 147. see Crops 
Operations, Surgical 167 
Organism 43 
Ornamentation 25 
-Ovam 46 
•Ovary 46 

P 

Pada Rajju 89 
Paddy 148, see Crops 
Pa das 92 


Paiaio 7 

Palmogra Seedlings 148, 
see also Crops 
Panacea, preparation 168 
Panchaka 17, 19, 21, 183 
Panchang 11, 181 
Panchanga Suddhi 28 
Papa 5 had varga 33 
Parents 188 
Parigha 13 
Paramamitra 18 
Paris 49 
Parturition 52 
Parvathi 59 
Pathological 45 
Peace, making 178, see 
also Auspicious Works 
Pearls 119 

Peach 147, see Crops 
Pea trees 143 
Pepper 147, see Crops 
Perfumers 119 
Periodicity 107 
Permanency 123, 25, 29 
Permanent Karanas 14 
Pericles 73 
Phalguna 64 
Phaseolus Radiatus 55 
Phases of Moon and 
diseases 162 
Physics 2 

Physiological lfi, 93 
Pilgrimage 28, 190, see 
also Travel 
Pisces 14, 33 
Pishta 56 

Pitha Nakshatra 91 , see 
Constellations 
Pitru 31, 24 
Planetary Friendships 86 
Planetary rays 3 


index 


213 


Planning 120 
Planting trees 3, 25, 
146-149 
Pleasures 25 
Plasm 53 
Plato 73 
Pledging 113 
Ploughing the land 145 
Plutarch 143 
Plum 147, see Crops 
Poisoning 26 
Political Department 118 
Political Sciences 114 
Polution 109 
Post-natal Ceremonies 15 
58*67 

Potatoes sowing 146, 
see Crops 

Poverty, see Kutas 
Pratyak Nakshatra 17, 22 
Prajapathi 24 
Prasna Marga 75 
Preceptors 119 
Precious metals 119 
Preeti 13 
Pregnancy 41 
Prejudices 104 
Pre-natal Ceremonies 15, 
40-58, see also Nisheka 
Printers 119 

Prisoners, seeking escaped 
176 

Prosperity, see Kutas 
Priya Yoga 103 
Processes 3 

Procession going on 26 
Profit, see Selling 
Progeny 41, see also 
Kutas 

Pruning plants 149 
Pseudo-sexologists 69 


Psycho-astrological 67 
Psychological 16, 93 
Pubba 15, 26 
Puberty 16 

Public Matters 169-174. 
191, see also 
Auspicious Works 
puja 129 
Pulse 91 

Pumpkins 147, see Crops 
Pumsavana 40, 43-56, 
185, see also Tara 
Bala, Chandra Bala 
Panchaka and 
Mahadoshas 
Punarvasu 15, 25 
Purchaser 137 
Purgative, taking 166 
Purna 40 
Puruhuta 31 
Purusa 132 
Puruththam, see Kutas 
Purvabhadra 15, 26 
Purvashadha 15, 26 
Pushan 25, 31 
Pushya 15, 101, 25, 26, 183 
IPushya Yoga 104 

Q 

Quadrants 57 
Quarrels among couples 
76 

R 

Races, Horse 175, see 
also Buying 
Radiation 2 
Radishes 143, 147, see 
Crops 

Ragi, sowing 146, 148, 
see Crops 
Rahu 14, 66 



214 


MUHTJRTIU 


Raja Panchakam 20 
Raja Yoga 131 
Rajju Kuta 78, 8S 
Rakshasa Gana 79-80, 
1S6 

Rama 59 
Ramakrisbnan 107 
Rasi Kuta 78, 84 
Rasyadhipathi 78, 85 8S 
Rat 82 

Reaping the Crop 149 
150 

Recovering money due 
113 

Religious rites 30 
Remedies 55 
Removing to another 
house 139, see also 
Shifting 

Repairing 2 6, 138 
Reproduction 41 
Residential 139 
Resonance 9 
Revati 15, 25, 26, 29 
Rheumatism, treatment 
165 

Rhythms 47 
Rice 147, see Crops 
Riktha 39, see Appendix 
'Rishaljhaka 55 
Rishis 106, 27 
Rogapanchakam 20, 21 
Rohini 15, 25 
Roofing 12S 
Root Crops 148, see 
Crops 

Rudhitam 66 
Rudra 24, 31 

Rundhram 66 

Russia 70 
Rye 147, see Crops 


8 

Sacerdotal fire 97 
Sacred Thread 63 
Sacrifices 22 
Sadhana IS, 113 
Sadharana Constellations' 
166 see Appendix 
Sadhva 13 
Saffron 143 
Sagittal ius 14, 33 
Sagraha Chandra 31 
Sahachara 55 
Sakuna or Sakini Karana 

13. 29 

Samdram 32 
Sampat 17 
Samudra J03 
Sankha 57 
Sanskrit 52 
Santhies 142 
Sarcastical Heckling 133 
Sarastvathi Yoga 116 
Sastras 69 

Satabhisha 15, 25, 26 
Sathamukhi 31 
Saturday 14, 39, 1S3 
Saturn 65 < 

Savita 25 
Scavengers 119 
Scheming - nefarious 26 
Scientists 43 
Scholar 11° ^ 

School Ms' t 
Scorpio 1* 1 
Sea Voyj 

J c 

Secre-* 

Tara 



INDEX 


215 


Bala, Panchaka and 
Mahadoshas 

Selling 112, 131, see also 
• Panchaka Sense 
Gratification 67 
Separation of friends, etc., 
25, 73 

Serpent 24, 82 
Servants, Employing 103, 
see also Panchaka 
Sesamum 14S, see Crops 
Sex, changing of 43-56, 
183 

Sexolgy 41 

Sexual Union 22, 25, 41-43 
Sex Urge 82 
Shares 105 

Shashtashta Viphagatha 
Chandra Dosha, 30, 37 
Shaving 22, 106-110 
Sheep 82, 112, 151 see also 
Buying and Selling 
Shifting from place to 
place 113, see also 
Mahadoshas 
Sbip-building and 

launching 170, see also 
Auspicious Works 
Ship-wrecks, social, 74 
Shodasa Karmas 15, 184 
Shortsightedness 133 
Siddha 13 
Siddha Yogas 38-40 
Siddhi 13 . 

Sidereal activity 3 
Sight 209 

Siver 40, see also Buying 
Similaritiesl 41 
Sira 10S 
Siro Rajju 89 
Site 120 


Siva 13 
Sky 134 

Sleshma Nakshatra 91 
Sobhana 13 
Sociologists 69 
Socrates 72 
Soil 131 

Solanum indicum 148, 
see Crops 
Soldiers 219 
Solicitors 119 
Sons, birth of 42, eldest 
188 

Soola 13, 29 
Sound 62, 141 
South, Journey towards 26 
Sowbhagya 13 
Sowing 25, 144, 146-149 
Specaial Yogas 38 
Special considerations 93, 
203, 22 

Spectrum analysis 142 
Spermatozoa 46 
Spirits 25 
Spoor jitham 66 
Sport 25 

Spuritham 66 * 

Square 75 
Sravana 15, 126, 25 
Sreenatha Yoga 103 
State, electing Head of 
the 172 

Stead Mr- 155 
Steel 110 ste also Buying 
Stellar Influences 123 
Sterility 45 
Sthree Deergha 78, 81 
S three Purva 94 
Strongholds, destroying 
178 

Stigma 22 


MtmPRTHA 


21C 

Strength of Constellation 
17 

Subha 13 
Subordination 119 
Sudra ego 90 

Sugar-cane 148, see Crops 
Sukarma 13 
Sukla 13 

Summer Crops 144 
Summary 180-192 
Sun 3 
Sunday 38 
Sunlight 141 
Superstition 133 
Superstructure 128 see 
Building 
Surveyors 119 
Suryanarain Rao 2, 192 
Surya Sankramana 30 
Swashta 23 
Swati 15 

T 

Taitula Karana 13, 39. 29 
Tamilian, marriage 
Treason 101 
TarabaJa 17,22, J S3 
Taurus 14 

Temperament, see Kutas 
Temples, building 173 
Terentia 74 
Testator 114 
Theeshna 113 
Theft 105, 136 
Theorists 27 
Thieves 126 
Thithi 11, 29, 181 » see 
Appendix. 

Thithi Gandanthara 33 
Thomas Carlyle 74 . 


Thrijanma 42 
Thula 144 
Thursday 29, 39 
Thury, Prof his theory, 43 
Thyyajya Kala 15 
Thyasthur 32 
Tides 47 
Tiger 83 
Timber 143 
Titanica, destroyed 155 
Time I, 3 152-155 
Tomato Planting 147, 
see Crops 
Tom fooleries 125 
Tonsure, see Chowlam 
Tools 110, see also Buying 
Tour 28 
Trade 112 

Travel 18, 21 22, 25, 

26. 113, 152-161. 190 
see also Tara Bala, 
Chandra Bala and 
Panchaka. 

Travel : — Short, long, 
pilgrimage, Air 160, 
Business, by water see 
Treatment, beginning 
22, 153-167 
Trees, felling 149 
Trines 57 

Tropic of Cancer 62 
Tuesday 14, 29, 39, 37, 

183 

Turnips 143, 147, see 
Typhoid 164 

U 

Udara Rajju 89 
Udayastha Suddhi 31 
Ugra Constellations 65 
165 



INDEX 


217 


Ugra Yogas 164 
Ultra-violet 142 
Under Currents 131 
Units of agreement • for 
marriage 7 8 
Unterberger, Prof, on 
Sex 43 

Upachayas 136, see 
Appendix 

Upanayanam 2l» 22. 63 
67. 185, see also 
• Auspicious Ceremonies 

Upatsu 108 
Utensils HO, see also 
Buying 

Uttara 15, 25 
Uttarabhadra 15, 25, 26 
Uttarashadha 15, 25 
Uttar ay ana 13+ 

Y 

Vahni 20, 31 
Vaisakha 64, 101 
Vaisya ego 90 
Vajra 13, 113 
Vaksha 108 
Vanija 13 

Vara 11, 31. 34, 29 
Varahamihira 129 
Variyan 13 
Varna 78 
Vanina 25, 31 
Vasishta 65 
\ Vasya Kuta 78, 88 
Vasu 25, 31 
Vasthu Purusha 126 
Vasthu Sastra 120, 190 
Vatha Naksbatra 91 
Vatsyayana 108 


Vayu 25 
Vedangas 114 
Vedas 114, 48 
Vedha 78, 89 
Vegetable 122 
Vehicles, acquiring of 26 
Venereal Diseases, 
treatment 165 
Venus 37 
Vessels 1 10 
Vetasa 132 
Vibration 3, 24 
Victory 177 
Vidhatru 32 
Vidhi 31 

Vidya 114-119, see also 
Aksharabhyasa 
Vidya Yoga 116 
Vijaya Yoga 104 
Vines 143 

Vipat Nakshatra 17, 22 
Virgo 14 

Visakha 15, 26, 96 
Visba Ghatika 34 
Vishkambha 13 
Vishnu 25, 32 
Vision 63 
Visvedeva 25 31 
Vitality 108 
Visti 13 
Vrishabha 95 
Vyaghata 13 
Vyatipata 13, 29, 35, 57 
Vydhruti 13, 29, 35, 37 


W 

"Wandering couple 89 
War 22 Starting 177, see 
also Auspicious Works 
Warriors 119 



snnnmTHA 


Waste 109 

WSpiS- . 

1vSm» appard 25, 

see also Cloth 
Wedlock 67 

» -move 
The blemish 37, 101 
Wheat 147 s« Planting 
White-washing 138 
Widowhood 72 
Wife 45 

Wills 111,"*?' 10 .. 

Auspicious Works 

Wine-sellers 119 . 

Woman’sjanma Nakshatra 

.23 


Womb of time 5 
Worship 125 

X 

Xantippe 72, 31 

Y 


Yama 24, 29 
Yatra 190 set Travel 
Yatra Phani Chakra 158 
Yoga 11, 13, 182 . 

Yogas adverse and their 

neutralisation 30 US, Alt 
see Appendix 

Yogini 158 

Yoni Kura, Male and 
Female, etc., 78, 
Yumigadyuti 32 

Z 

Zeno 73 


