MUHURTHA 
(Electional  Astrology) 

B.  V.  RAMAN 


MUHURTHA  (Electional  Astrology) 

B.  V.  RAMAN  ^ 

CHAPTER  I The  Importance  of  Muhurtha 

CHAPTER  II  General  Hints 

CHAPTER  III  The  Birth  Star  and  the  Birth  Moon 

CHAPTER  IV  Influence  of  Constellations 

CHAPTER  V Special  Adverse  Yogas  and  their  Neutralisation 

CHAPTER  VI  On  Certain  Special  Yogas 

CHAPTER  VII  Pre-Natal  Ceremonies 

CHAPTER  VIII  Post-Natal  Ceremonies 

CHAPTER  XI  Marriage 

Special  Considerations 


Exceptions 


Destructive  Constellations 


The  So-called  Kuja  Dosha 

Electing  a Time  for  Marriage 

CHAPTER  X Elections  Concerning  General  Matters 

CHAPTER  XI  Elections  Pertaining  to  Education 

CHAPTER  XII  House  Building 

CHAPTER  XIII  Agriculture  and  Farming 

CHAPTER  XIV  Travel 

CHAPTER  XV  Medical  Elections 


CHAPTER  XVI  Public  Matters 


CHAPTER  XVII  Miscellaneous  Elections 
CHAPTER  XVIII  Summary 


Concluding  Remarks 


CHAPTER  I 

The  Importance  of  Muhurtha 

The  value  of  Time  is  inestimable.  All  objects  in  nature  are  produced  in 
Time,  developed  in  Time  and  destroyed  in  Time.  The  truth  of  these 
statements  requires  no  further  proof.  It  stands  unchallenged.  Here  we 
have  a grand  problem  for  solution.  If  the  creative,  protective  and 
destructive  forces  are  embedded  in  the  all-Powerful  Time  recognised  as 
the  great  KALAPURUSHA  in  the  astrological  literature,  then  will  it  not  be 
reasonable  to  study  the  influences  of  the  various  energies  issued  from 
the  solar  globe  and  from  the  other  globes  dependent  upon  the  Sun  for 


their  supply  of  all  vital  energies  and  reflected  by  them  under  various 
modifications?  Astrology  is  a science  which  deals  with  Time  proceeding 
from  the  Sun  and  all  the  wonderful  phenomena  which  are  embodied  in 
that  mysterious  agency.  Scientific  investigations  have  now  led  to  the 
conclusion  that  "we  are  faced  with  a cosmic  determinism".  Astrology  "is 
a complete  system  of  philosophy  that  requires  the  assistance  of  neither 
metaphysics  nor  physics.  It's  the  empirical  systematisation  of  the  idea 
that  radiation  is  the  determinant  of  all  terrestrial  phenomena.  That  idea 
is  as  valid  today  as  when  it  was  first  started  and  the  most  striking 
experimental  evidence  of  its  validity  has  been  furnished  by  modern 
scientific  research.  Being  the  first  human  attempt  to  apply  mathematics 
to  biology  its  conclusions  and  broad  generalisations  are  being  confirmed 
by  newer  scientific  data". 

As  to  how  planets  influence  human  beings,  we  do  not  propose  to 
answer  in  these  pages.  This  particular  subject  has  been  dealt  with  in 
detail  in  An  Introduction  to  Study  of  Astrology  by  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain 
Rao  and  in  our  Planetary  Influences  on  Human  Affairs  to  which  the 
reader  may  conveniently  refer  if  he  wishes  to  understand  the  rationale 
of  astrology.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  we  are  living  in  a veritable  sea  of 
vibratory  energies  which  unerringly  and  equitably  supply  the  means  of 
creating,  maintaining  and  destroying  life  and  its  activities  in  our  little 
universe.  Planetary  x-rays  are  unseen  vibrations  and  they  affect 
biological  an.i  psychological  processes 

If  we  admit  that  the  Sun  is  the  source  of  all  life  and  its  activities  then  it 
follows  that  in  Time  - which  is  denoted  by  the  Sun  - is  embedded  all 
forces  or  energies  for  the  works  of  creation,  protection  and  destruction 
and  these  energies  have  been  very  carefully  unearthed  by  the  ancient 
Maharshis  and  embodied  into  the  formulae  found  so  profusely  in  the 
pages  of  MUHURTHA,  an  important  division  of  astrology.  Time  is  the 
essence  of  all  things  - their  creator,  protector  and  destroyer.  The 
seasons  of  natural  law  into  which  the  common  year  is  divided  have  their 
counterparts  in  the  processional  cycle  of  the  Sun.  Periods  of  planting, 
cultivation,  harvest,  maturity  and  decay  are  common  to  every  subcycle 
of  its  activity.  Time  has  got  its  own  properties.  The  first  substance  of 
Time  is  of  course  energy  generated  by  sidereal  activity.  Its  forms  are 
active  when  phenomenal  and  potential  when  non-phenomenal.  Time 
therefore  can  be  said  to  be  the  basic  working  power  in  astrology.  This  is 
especially  so  in  Muhurtha  as  within  the  time  chosen  for  a particular 
purpose  all  the  good  vibrations  have  to  be  centered  such  that  the 


energy  generated  would  nullify  all  other  unfavourable  factors  and 
ensure  success,  of  the  enterprise. 

What  is  meant  by  Muhurtha?  How  far  is  it  superior  to  horoscopy?  These 
are  important  questions  which  we  shall  try  to  answer  in  this  chapter. 
Horoscopy  reads  what  is  indicated  by  the  planetary  positions  at  the  time 
of  birth  being  the  resultant  of  one's  previous  karma.  In  other  words,  it 
has  to  do  only  with  what  one  has  brought  with  him  the  sum-total  of  one's 
inheritance  - physical,  mental  and  material.  Here  we  do  nothing  more 
than  read  simply  a technical  letter  as  if  it  were  written  in  planetary  and 
other  symbols.  Muhurtha,  on  the  other  hand,  is  much  more  important.  It 
gives  valuable  directions  by  following  which  the  person  will  be  enabled 
to  remove,  neutralise,  counteract  or  overcome  the  evils  indicated  by  the 
horoscopic  chart.  Horoscopy  is  diagnostic.  It  merely  points  out  the  ills 
but  prescribes  no  remedies.  Muhurtha  is  prescriptive  as  well  as 
preventive.  It  tells  how  by  undertaking  ventures  at  auspicious  times  one 
can  ward  off  the  evils  and  ensure  success.  Suppose  break  in  education 
is  indicated  by  the  position  of  evil  planets  in  the  fourth  house  from  the 
Ascendant  and  by  the  affliction  of  Jupiter,  lord  of  education  and 
Mercury,  lord  of  intelligence.  These  planetary  conjunctions  indicate  want 
of  education  in  a man  as  a result  of  his  karma  in  previous  states  of 
existence.  Muhurtha  says  that  the  obstructions  to  educational  progress 
by  the  planetary  conjunctions  indicated  at  the  time  of  birth  can  be 
minimised  by  fixing  an  auspicious  time*  for  commencing  the  education. 
Suppose  evil  planets  in  the  fifth  house  indicate  loss  of  children.  Then 
Muhurtha  comes  to  his  help  first  by  asking  him  to  marry  at  a certain 
auspicious  time  when  ethereal  currents  released  from  the  planets  will  be 
so  powerful  as  to  minimise  or  modify  the  afflictions  to  the  extent  that  the 
birth  and  survival  of  at  least  some  children  may  be  ensured.  Thus 
Muhurtha  helps  one  to  minimise  or  modify  the  evils  of  our  past  Karma  to 
a considerable  extent.  I must  warn  my  readers  not  to  imagine  that 
Muhurtha  is  the  masterkey  to  all  wealth  and  happiness.  Muhurtha  tells 
us  when  to  do  a certain  thing  if  failure  is  to  be  avoided. 

We  have  said  above  that  creative,  protective  and  destructive  forces  are 
embedded  in  the  womb  of  Time.  As  the  Sun  and  the  planets  are  the 
signatures  of  time  and  as  all  the  forces  or  energies  have  their  source  of 
origin  in  the  Sun,  the  movements  of  planets  give  us  a clue  as  to  when 
the  various  kinds  of  creative  and  destructive  forces  which  are  nothing 
but  radiations  set  in. 


Taking  an  everyday  example:  nobody  could  say  that  the  influence  of  the 


Sun  during  the  course  of  one  day  will  be  the  same.  The  Sun  in  the 
morning,  the  Sun  in  the  afternoon,  the  Sun  in  the  evening  and  the  Sun 
at  midnight  cannot  and  will  not  be  the  same  in  heat  or  in  any  of  his  other 
agencies-light,  magnetism,  electricity,  etc.  A man  wants  to  have  a picnic 
and  we  ask  him  to  have  it  either  in  the  morning  or  in  the  evening  when 
the  Sun  is  not  very  hot.  This  will  be  asking  him  to  reject  the  noon  as 
inauspicious  for  pleasure.  Here  the  physical  effects  are  demonstrable  to 
some  extent.  Similarly  a man  wants  to  have  a pleasant  function.  We 
advise  him  to  have  it  at  a suitable  lime  when,  in  spite  of  the  season 
being  rainy,  there  is  no  chance  of  the  weather  being  cloudy  or  rainy.  Will 
we  be  wrong  in  asking  him  to  reject  the  time  when  the  weather  is  likely 
to  be  disturbed?  The  same  reasoning  should  guide  us  to  appreciate  the 
idea  behind  the  selection  of  auspicious  times  for  our  various  activities. 
There  is  a time  to  sow  and  a time  to  reap.  Why  not  we  do  the  sowing 
operations  during  harvest  season?  Nature  would  be  against  us.  This  is 
shown  by  the  Sun's  position.  During  the  sowing  season,  creative  forces 
are  in  operation.  When  an  important  activity  is  to  be  undertaken, 
destructive  forces  have  to  be  screened  off.  All  the  planets  move 
incessantly  and  release  different  kinds  of  forces  and  the  Maharshis 
have  given  us  clues  as  to  how  best  we  can  make  use  of  the  grand 
constructive  vibrations  operating  in  nature  if  our  endeavours  are  to  be 
endowed  with  success. 

Even  animals  instinctively  feel  that  they  should  move  in  harmony  with 
nature.  For  instance,  the  palolo  worm  found  in  the  sea  around  the  Fiji 
Islands  reacts  in  a very  definite  way  to  lunar  and  solar  cycles.  This 
animal  lives  the  greater  part  of  its  life  in  deep  coral  rocks  beneath  the 
sea.  Towards  November,  the  hind  portion  of  the  body  becomes 
distended  with  migrate  eggs.  In  the  early  morning,  exactly  one  week 
after  the  full  moon  in  November,  the  hind  portion  detaches  itself  as  a 
special  reproductive  individual  which  comes  to  the  surface,  discharges 
its  eggs  in  an  explosive  manner  and  then  dies.  There  is  therefore  some 
sort  of  an  instinctive  appreciation  on  the  part  of  the  worm  of  the  Moon's 
influences,  and  that  the  eggs  should  be  discharged  only  when  the 
planetary  vibrations  are  harmoniously  disposed.  When  such  is  the  case, 
a human  being  is  to  be  much  more  conscious  about  forces  that  make  or 
mar  his  progress  and  how  by  the  selection  of  a proper  moment,  he 
could  take  advantage  of  the  constructive  forces  operating  in  nature. 

Each  moment  has  got  its  own  potency  and  as  Carl  Jung  says  "whatever 
is  born  or  done  this  moment  of  time  has  the  qualities  of  this  moment  of 


time".  Hence  the  moment  of  birth  or  the  moment  at  which  we  elect  to  do 
an  important  act  is  not  certainly  an  insignificant  epoch.  Cosmic 
radiations  pouring  at  the  moment  on  the  earth  from  outer  space  and 
coming  from  various  stars  and  planets  act  on  our  brain  cells  which  take 
up  these  cosmic  radiations  which  are  transformed  into  vital  electricity.  It 
must  be  noted  that  in  all  undertakings  invisible  energies  are  set  in 
motion  by  ourwords,  deeds,  thoughts  and  of  course  by  our  actions.  You 
may  call  these  invisible  forces  as  electric,  ethereal  or  electro -magnetic 
or  cosmic  radiations.  As  man  himself  is  an  electrical  body  discharging 
different  kinds  of  electrical  energies,  his  success  and  failure  are  simply 
matters  of  attraction  and  repulsion  between  himself  and  the  objects  with 
which  he  has  to  deal  in  his  day-to-day  activities. 

Muhurtha  could  therefore  be  defined  as  that  precious  moment  when  the 
vibrations  radiated  by  man  are  altered  to  a specific  wavelength  capable 
of  entering  resonance  with  the  radiations  of  the  same  vibratory  rate 
coming  from  other  planets  and  stars. 

CHAPTER  II 
General  Hints 

A very  important  place  is  assigned  in  Hindu  astrology  to  the  part  played 
by  the  Moon  in  the  fixing  of  propitious  times.  The  Moon  rules  the  mind 
and  all  our  psychological  inhibitions  and  his  position  in  the  election  chart 
is  tO  be  particularly  dignified.  Moreover,  whenever  an  election  is  to  be 
made,  it  should  always  bear  a sympathetic  connection  with  the  birth 
chart.  Should  the  radical  horoscope  indicate  several  afflictions,  no 
Muhurtha  can  ensure  real  success.  In  fact,  the  strength  of  the  birth  chart 
may  even  prevent  the  person  from  taking  advantage  of  the  propitious 
period.  Or  at  best,  the  chances  of  failure  may  be  somewhat  minimised. 
There  is,  therefore,  an  important  factor  to  be  considered,  viz.,  whether 
the  birth  chart  is  really  so  powerfully  afflicted  as  to  offset  the  chances  of 
success  shown  in  the  election  chart.  When  people  do  not  know  the  birth 
chart,  the  best  thing  would  be  to  ascertain  their  name  constellation  (see 
Appendix  at  the  end  of  the  book)  and  study  the  transit  influences 
operating  at  the  period  in  question.  Whether  or  not  the  radical  chart  is 
strong,  Hindu  astrology  always  takes  cognisance  of  the  fact  that  contact 
is  maintained  between  the  Jamma  Tara  (the  constellational  position  of 
the  Moon  at  the  time  of  one's  birth)  and  if  the  birth  time  is  not  known, 
with  the  Nama  Tara  (name-constellation),  and  the  election  chart. 


Whilst  it  is  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  election  chart  is  likely  to 
be  affected  by  the  benefic  or  malefic  nature  of  the  directions  operating 
at  the  moment  in  the  birth  chart  and  the  inherent  strength  of  the 
horoscope,  it  is  not  necessary  to  go  into  it  in  detail.  A number  of 
combinations  is  given  in  ancient  works  to  so  strengthen  the  election 
chart  as  to  make  it  fruitful  independent  of  the  birth  influences.  These 
details  will  be  discussed  in  their  appropriate  places. 

Before  we  take  up  electional  astrology  proper,  a short  description  of  the 
Panchanga  or  the  Hindu  almanac  is  very  necessary,  as  the  important 
items  constituting  a Panchanga  have  an  intimate  bearing  on  the  fixing  of 
auspicious  times.  The  Panchanga  consists  of  five  limbs  or  accessories, 
viz:  Tithi  (lunar  day),  Vara  (weekday),  Nakshatra  (constellation).  Yoga  (a 
luni-solar  day),  and  Karana  (half  a lunar  day).  The  reader  will  have  to  be 
familiar  with  these  technicalities  though  by  far  the  most  mportant  ones 
are  the  lunar  day,  constellation  and  weekday.  The  five  limbs  of  the 
Panchanga  are  supposed  to  represent  the  five  sources  of  ethereal 
energy  of  which  some  are  visible  and  others  invisible  and  which  when 
properly  secured  are  said  to  conduce  the  health,  wealth  and  prosperity 
of  mankind. 

Tithi.  - This  is  the  time  during  which  the  difference  of  the  increment  of 
longitude  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  amounts  to  12°.  The  lunar  day  is  to 
the  Hindu  of  the  most  prominent  practical  importance,  since  by  it  are 
regulated  the  performance  of  many  religious  ceremonies  and  upon  it 
depend  the  chief  considerations  of  Muhurtha  or  electional  astrology.  In 
other  words,  the  tithi  represents  the  lunar  energy,  and  lunar  energy  is 
identified  with  mental  energy.  Therefore  a minute  knowledge  of  the 
lunar  movements  constituting  tithis  is  said  to  give  us  wealth. 

Each  tithi  (See  Table  II)  or  lunar  day  is  equal  to  0.9483  of  a day  so  that 
a lunar  month  is  equal  to  about  29.53  days.  The  ending  time  of  a tithi  is 
the  moment  at  which  the  Moon  is  removed  from  the  Sun  by  multiples  of 
12°.  Thus  when  the  Moon  is  12° away  from  the  Sun,  the  first  lunar  day 
or  Prathama  ends;  when  24°  Dwrtiya  and  so  on;  when  in  conjunction  the 
Amavasya  {New  Moon),  and  when  in  opposition  (180°)  Pournimasya 
(full  Moon)ends. 

It  is  enough  for  astrological  purposes  to  know  what  tithi  rules  at  the  time 
of  birth. 


To  find  the  lunar  day  or  tithi  deduct  the  longitude  of  the  Sun  from  that  of 


the  Moon.  If  the  difference  is  less  than  1 80°,  it  is  the  bright  half  or  Sukia 
Paksha;  if  it  is  more  than  180°,  it  is  the  dark  half  or  Krishna  Paksha. 


Divide  the  balance  (Moon-Sun)  by  12°(or  720').  The  quotient  represents 
the  number  of  tithis  elapsed  and  the  remainder  the  part  of  the  next 
(current)  tithi  that  has  elapsed. 

Thus  to  know  the  tithi  ruling  on  8-8-1896  at  4h  10m  20s  (L.M.T.)  at 
Bangalore.  First  we  deduct  the  longitude  of  the  Sun  (1 14°  40'  or  6880') 
from  that  of  the  Moon  (326°  or  19560').  The  remainder  is  21 1 °20' 
(12680').  It  is  more  than  180°  and  hence  it  is  the  dark  half  (Krishna 
Paksha).  Dividing  by  12°  (or  720')  the  quotient  is  17,  which  means  the 
lunar  day  is  the  1 8th  (or  3rd  lunar  day  of  the  dark  half).  440'  (7°  20')  of 
its  portion  has  been  traversed,  leaving  280'  (4°  40')  yet  to  be  traversed. 

If  this  remainder  is  multiplied  by  24  and  divided  by  the  difference  of  the 
daily  motions  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  we  get  the  number  of  hours 
(from,  the  time  of  birth  or  question)  still  covering  the  tithi  in  question. 

Suppose  the  daily  motion  of  the  Moon  on  the  day 
of  birth  is  11?  47' 

*Daily  motion  of  the  Sun  57' 


10?  50' 

Difference:  = 650' 

* For  convenience  sake  more  than  30"  are  taken  as  1 ' and  less  then  30" 
rejected. 

Multiplying  280  by  24  and  dividing  the  product  by  660  we  get 

280  x 24 


= lOh.  57m. 


650 

which  added  to  the  given  time  gives  3h.  27m.  = 3h.  a.m.  (on  9th  August) 


which  will  be  the  ending  moment  of  the  tithi  (3rd  lunar  day  of  the  dark 
half). 

Vara.  - This  is  of  course  the  ordinary  weekday.  The  weekdays  are 
named  in  accordance  with  certain  astronomical  considerations. 
Therefore  on  a weekday  bearing  the  name  of  a particular  planet,  the 
influence  of  that  planet  is  said  to  be  predominant. 

The  weekdays  are  numbered  thus:  Sunday  1 . Monday  2,  Tuesday  3, 
Wednesday  4.  Thursday  5,  Friday  6 and  Saturday  7. 

Wakshatra.  - The  zodiac  is  marked  by  27  constellations  or  nakshatras 
often  termed  lunar  mansions.  The  position  of  a nakshatra  is  dependent 
upon  the  actual  time  taken  by  the  Moon  to  traverse  1 3°  20'  of  ecliptic 
arc,  of  course,  always  beginning  from  the  first  point  of  the  constellational 
zodiac.  If  constellations  are  huge  electromagnetic  bodies  radiating 
energy  into  space,  there  seems  to  be  sense  in  attributing  certain 
influences  to  these  radiations  and  the  Moon  coming  into  contact  with 
such  radiations  probably  exercises  special  influences.  The  Janma  Tara 
(birth  constellation)  or  Dina  Tara  (the  constellation  of  the  day 
concerned)  is  obtained  thus: 

The  ecliptic  is  divided  into  27  constellations  (See  Appendix  III)  of  13° 20' 
(or  800'  of  arc)  each.  Reduce  the  longitude  of  the  Moon  to  minutes  and 
divide  the  same  by  800.  The  quotient  is  the  number  of  constellations 
already  passed,  and  the  remainder,  the  part  covered  in  the  current 
asterism  the  Moon  is  in.  For  the  data  given  under  tithi. 

The  Moon  is  in  Aquarius  25?  59'  46" 

= 10  signs  25?  59' 46" 

= 325?  59'  46" 

= 19559'  46" 

Dividing  this  by  800 
= Quotient  24 
remainder  359'  46" 

The  ruling  star  is  the  25th,  viz.,  Poorvabhadra.  359'  46"  have  been 
covered  in  this  star  and  the  balance  to  be  traversed  is  (800'  - 359'  46"). 


Yoga.  - it  is  the  period  during  which  the  joint  motion  in  longitude  of  the 
Sun  and  the  Moon  amounts  to  1 3 ° 20'.  Every  Hindu  almanac  contains  a 
column  specifying  the  yoga  for  each  day  and  when  it  would  end.  There 
are  twenty-seven  yogas  (see  Appendix  IV). 

Yoga  represents  a conjunction  of  subtle  influences  which  strengthen  our 
bodies,  remove  the  germs  of  disease,  and  help  us  to  enjoy  health  and 
life  in  its  various  phases. 

YOGA 

The  following  formula  is  according  to  Surya  siddhanta: 

Sun's  longitude  + Moon's  longitude 


13"  20'(or  800') 

Taking  the  example  date  given  under  tithi: 
Sun's  longitude  114?  40' 

Moon's  longitude  326?  O' 


Total  440?  40' 

= 80?  40' 

= 4840' 

Dividing  4840'  by  800  we  get  quotient  6 and  remainder  40.  6 Yogas 
have  transpired  and  the  7th,  viz,  Sukarman  is  ruling.  40'  is  the  part  of 
the  current  (Sukarman)  that  has  elapsed.  Yet  to  be  covered  in  this  Yoga 
is  760'.  To  ascertain  the  time  at  which  the  current  Yoga  ends,  divide 
760'  by  the  sum  of  the  daily  motions  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  (0°57'  + 

1 1 ° 47' s 1 2 ° 44'  or  764')  and  multiply  by  24  to  reduce  the  results  to 
hours. 


760  x 24 


= 23 h.  50m. 


764 

The  Sukarman  Yoga  ends  at  23h.  50m.  from  the  time  of  birth  or  any 
given  time. 

The  Table  of  Yogas  (Appendix  IV)  enables  one  to  ascertain  the  Yoga  on 
the  basis  of  the  joint  motion  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon. 

Thus  in  the  example  the  sum  of  the  Sun's  and  the  Moon's  longitude  is 
80°  40'.  According  to  Appendix  IV  Sukarman  commences  at  80°  and 
extends  tilt  93°  20'. 

Karana.  - And  finally  we  have  karana,  or  half  a lunar  day  meaning 
thereby  the  time  taken  to  complete  the  distance  which  should  be  the 
multiple  of  6 between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  There  are  1 1 karanas,  viz. 
(1)  Bava,  (2)  Balava,  (3)  Kaulava,  (4)  Taitula,  (5)  Garija,  (6)  Vanija,  (7) 
Visti,  (8)  Sakuna,  (9)  Chatushpada,  (10)  Naga  and  (11)  Kimstughna. 

The  first  seven  come  by  rotation  eight  times  in  a lunar  month, 
commencing  with  the  second  half  of  the  first  lunar  day.  The  last  four  are 
said  to  be  permanent  karanas  and  occur  in  order  with  the  second  half  of 
the  29th  lunar  day. 

In  Muhurtha,  it  is  always  advisable  to  strengthen  the  ascendant  and  its 
lord  and  the  Moon.  Each  type  of  election  requires  fortification  of  some 
appropriate  hoase  and  planet  and  these  will  be  discussed  in  their  proper 
places.  Even  when  the  ascendant  is  strong,  certain  parts  of  it  which  go 
under  the  name  of  Lagna  tyajya  should  be  rejected.  Sometimes,  only 
fixed  signs  are  to  be  chosen;  sometimes  only  movable  signs  are  to  be 
chosen.  Hence,  a reader  has  to  very  carefully  understand  these  subtle 
distinctions. 

In  Aries,  Taurus,  Sagittarius  and  Virgo,  the  first  three  degrees  should  be 
avoided  as  it  is  supposed  to  be  in  the  nature  of  a serpent  (bhujanga) 
and  hence  destructive.  In  regard  to  Pisces,  Capricorn,  Cancer  and 
Scorpio,  the  last  (three  degrees)  has  to  be  avoided  as  it  is  supposed  to 
be  presided  over  by  the  evil  force  of  Rahu.  The  middle  half  ghati  (13° 

30'  to  16° 30')  should  be  rejected  with  regard  to  Gemini,  Libra,  Leo  and 
Aquarius  as  it  is  ruled  by  an  evil  force  termed  Gridhra. 

Tuesday  and  Saturday  should  be  avoided  for  all  good  and-auspicious 
works. 


The  4th,  8th,  *1 2th  and  14th  lunar  days  both. in  the  bright  and  the  dark 
halves  are  unsuitable  for  undertaking  any  auspicious  work. 

* In  our  experience,  the  12th  lunar  day  is  quite  auspicious;  provided  the 
other  factors  are  strong,  12th  lunar  day  can  be  employed  for  auspicious 
works. 

Each  constellation  has  its  own  tyajyakala  or  negative  period  which  is  to 
be  invariably  avoided.  The  negative  periods  commence  at  the  times 
marked  below  against  each  constellation  lasting  for  4 ghatis  (1  hour  36 
minutes)  from  thence. 

Aswini  50;  Bharani  4;  Krittika  30;  Rohini  40;  Mrigasira  14;  Aridra  21 ; 
Punarvasu  30;  Pushya  20;  Aslesha  32;  Makha  30;  Pubba  20;  Uttara  1 ; 
Hasta  21 ; Chitta  20;  Swati  1 4;  Visakha  1 4;  Anuradha  1 0;  Jyeshta  1 4; 
Moola  20;  Poorvashadha  20;  Uttarashadha  20;  Sravana  10;  Dhanishta 
10;  Satabhisha  18;  Poorvabhadra  16;  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati  30. 

In  the  scheme  that  is  followed,  I have  first  of  all  dealt  with  the  pre-natal 
and  post-natal  ceremonies  which  are  designated  as  Shodasa  Karmas 
which  every  Hindu  is  supposed  to  undergo  in  his  life's  journey  from 
cradle  to  the  grave.  Some  of  these  ceremonies  such  as  baptising,  first 
feeding,  marriage,  etc.,  are  common  to  all  communities  so  that  non- 
Hindus  can  make  use  of  them  with  equal  benefit. 

The  Shodasa  Karmas  (sixteen  kinds  of  ceremonies),  which  a Hindu  is 
enjoined  to  undergo,  seem  to  have  been  based  upon  certain  critical 
psychological  and  physiological  developments  (climacterics)  which 
occur  in  a man's  life  at  certain  definite  intervals.  It  must  be  noted  that 
the  successive  stage  when  the  human  infant  assumes  the  upright 
posture,  commences  to  speak  and  so  on,  occur  at  fixed  times  in  normal 
development  so  much  so  that  a child  that  does  not  begin  to  talk  or  walk 
at  the  proper  time  becomes  a source  of  anxiety  to  his  parents.  The 
change  of  teeth  also  marks  a transition.  Permanent  dentition  sets  in 
about  7 years  after  birth.  Seven  years  after  this  another  crisis  is  reached 
and  that  is  puberty.  A further  change  is  noted  about  the  age  of  21 . 

There  are  of  course  several  other  critical  periods  such  as  the 
menopause  occurring  at  the  age  of  49  or  50  (7*7),  another  grand 
climacteric  at  63  (7*9)  often  accompanied  by  death.  In  the  human  being, 
it  is  said  that  every  cell  of  the  body  is  renewed  every  seven  years, 
although  this  is  not  quite  correct  for  all  tissues.  Thus,  the  Shodasa 
Karmas  are  supposed  to  fortify  the.  human  body  and  human  mind  at 


such  critical  phases.  Perhaps  a deeper  study  of  the  problem  will  reveal 
a more  correct  perspective  of  the  rationale. 

CHAPTER  III 

The  Birth  Star  and  the  Birth  Moon 

In  fixing  auspicious  times,  apart  from  the  special  planetary  combinations 
to  be  applied  for  specific  purposes,  there  are  three  factors  which  are 
common  to  almost  all  elections  and  which  require  the  astrologer's  most 
careful  attention.  They  are  (a)  Tarabala  or  strength  of  constellation,  (b) 
Chandrabala  or  lunar  strength,  and  (c)  Panchaka  or  five-source  energy. 
These  three  should  be  satisfactorily  disposed.  Otherwise  an  election 
chart  will  lose  its  significance. 

Strength  of  Constellation.  - The  constellation  ruling  at  the  time  of  birth  is 
one's  Janmanakshatra  or  birth  star  and  the  zodiacal  sign  in  which  the 
Moon  is  situated  at  the  time  of  one's  birth  is  one's  Janma  Rasi  or  Birth 
Moon.  These  are  highly  important.  Count  from  the  birth  constellation  to 
the  one  ruling  on  the  particular  day  on  which  a new  work  is  to  be  done 
or  a journey  undertaken  and  divide  the  number  by  9 if  divisible. 

Otherwise  keep  it  as  it  is.  If  the  remainder  is  1 (janma)  it  indicates 
danger  to  body;  if  2 (sampat)  wealth  and  prosperity;  if  3 (vipat)  dangers, 
losses  and  accidents;  if  4 (kshema)  prosperity;  if  5 (pratyak)  obstacles;  if 
6 (sadhana)  realisation  of  ambitions;  if  7 (naidhana)  dangers;  if  8 (mitra) 
good;  and  if  9 (parama  mitra)  very  favourable.  There  are  certain 
exceptions  to  the  favourable  and  unfavourable  results  ascribed  above 
and  they  will  be  dealt  with  in  the  appropriate  places. 

Example:  - A man  born  in  Aswini  elects  to  undertake  a journey  on  a day 
ruled  by  Sravana.  Counting  from  the  man's  Janma  Nakshatra  to  the  one 
ruling  on  the  proposed  day.  the  number  will  be  22.  This  divided  by  9 
leaves  a remainder  of  4.  This  goes  under  kshema  or  favourable  and 
hence  Tarabala  is  good. 

When  the  day's  nakshatra  falls  in  the  first  Paryaya  or  cycle,  that  is-within 
the  first  nine  stars,  the  evil  suggested  above,  viz.  3rd  star  Vipat.  5th  star 
Pratyak.  etc.,  holds  good  in  full. 

In  the  Second  Paryaya  or  cycle,  e.g.  Janma  Nakshatra,  etc.,  falling  from 
the  10th  to  18th,  the  evil  is  said  to  be  only  fifty  per  cent.  In  fact  the  evil  is 
centred  only  in  the  first  quarter  of  the  3rd  (Vipat),  the  4th  quarter  of  the 


5th  (Pratyak)  and  the  3rd  quarter  of  the  7th  (Naidhana)  of  the  second 
cycle. 

In  the  third  cycle  or  Paryaya,  the  Janma,  Vipat,  etc.,  falling  from  the  19th 
to  27th  the  evil  is  said  to  be  almost  negligible.  Suppose  the  birth  star  is 
Rohini  and  the  day's  star  is  Satabhisha.  The  day's  star  counted  from 
birth  star  comes  to  21 . or  the  3rd  in  the  third  cycle.  The  3rd  is  Vipat.  But 
it  is  said  to  carry  little  or  no  evil. 

In  my  humble  experience,  it  is  better  to  avoid  Vipat  and  Naidhana  stars 
for  all  important  undertakings  - long  journeys,  marriage,  starting  of  an 
enterprise,  etc.,  even  if  such  a star  happens  to  fall  in  the  3rd -cycle, 
unless  there  are  other  counteracting  factors. 

According  to  some  classical  writers,  the  22nd  and  27th  stars  are  always 
inauspicious.  But  our  experience  is  to  the  contrary.  The  22nd  is  always 
sadhana  and  the  27th  parama  mftra  and  hence  they  could  be 
considered  as  auspicious. 

Chandrabala.  - As  we  have  already  said  above,  the  consideration  of  the 
Moon  and  his  position  are  of  much  importance  in  Muhurtha.  To  be  at  its 
best,  the  Moon  should  not  occupy  in  the  election  chart,  a position  that 
happens  to  represent  the  6th,  8th  or  12th  from  the  person's  Janma  Rasi. 

To  take  another  example:  a person  born  in  Mrigasira  (Janma  Rasi  being 
Taurus)  wants  to  have  his  marriage  on  a day  ruled  by  Bharani  which 
means  the  Moon  will  be  in  Aries.  There  is  neither  Tarabala  (as  Bharani 
will  be  Naidhana  to  Mrigasira)  nor  Chandrabala  (the  Moon  on  the 
election  day  falls  in  Aries  which  would  be  the  12th  from  the  subject's 
Janma  Rasi).  Hence,  the  day  is  most  inauspicious.  Certain 
constellations,  apart  from  their  being  harmonious  or  otherwise  disposed 
with  reference  to  one's  own  Janma  Nakshatra,  should  be  avoided  for 
certain  specific  purposes  on  account  of  their  inherent  evil  natures.  In 
fact,  Bharani  is  condemned  for  all  good  work  and  it  has  to  be 
scrupulously  avoided  for  all  good  work. 

Panchaka  (Five-Source  Energy).  - For  matters  of  ordinary  importance 
such  as  interviewing  superiors  or  going  on  short  journeys,  a favourable 
Tarabala  will  do  and  there  is  no  need  to  consider  the  panchaka.  But  in 
regard  to  very  important  ceremonies  such  as  marriage,  nuptials,  entry 
into  new  houses,  etc.,  this  should  be  carefully  looked  into.  There  are 
several  methods  by  which  panchaka  is  determined.  I shall  give  the  most 


common  method.  In  the  panchaka  determination  apparently,  five 
sources  of  planetary,  stellar  and  zodiacal  energies  are  involved.  Take 
the  number  of  the  lunar  day  (from  the  1st  of  the  month),  the  number  of 
the  weekday,  Sunday  I.  etc.),  the  number  of  the  constellation  (from 
Aswini)  and  the  number  of  the  Lagna  (from  Aries).  Add  these  together 
and  divide  the  total  by  9.  If  the  remainder  is  1 (mrityu  panchakam),  it 
indicates  danger;  if  2 (agni  panchakam),  risk  from  fire;  if  4 (raja 
panchakam),  bad  results;  if  6 (chora  panchakam),  evil  happenings  and  if 
8 (roga  panchakam),  disease.  If  the  remainder  is  3,  5,  7 or  zero  then  it  is 
good.  As  an  example,  let  us  assume  that  A wants  to  start  a business  on 
a day  and  time  otherwise  conforming  to  the  requirement  of  Muhurtha- 
the  constellation  being  Aslesha,  the  lunar  day  being  the  13th,  the  rising 
sign  being  Virgo  and  the  weekday  Sunday.  Calculating  the  panchaka, 
we  get  - 


Number ofthe  lunarday  13 
Number  of  constellation  9 


Number  of  weekday  1 
Number  of  zodiacal  sign  6 


29 

Dividing  this  by  9,  we  get  29/9  = 3 2/9  - 2 as  remainder.  It  indicates 
Vahni  or  fire  and  hence  the  time  selected  is  not  favourable.  In  dealing 
with  this  subject.  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao  observes  thus  in  bis  famous 
book  ASTROLOGICAL  MIRROR:  "There  are  many  things  as  in 
medicine,  so  in  astrology  which  when  properly  understood  and  followed 
would  tend  to  minimise  the  chances  of  evil  influences  indicated  by 
planets,  lunar  days,  constellations  and  rising  signs  and  in  all  these  the 
idea  seems  to  be  to  avert  the  evils  which  would  arise  as  a matter  of  fact 
from  the  attraction  or  combination  ot  the  subtle  influences  contained  in 
Time  and  the  chemical  changes  which  arise  from  the  conjunctions  and 
repulsions  of  various  forms  of  energies,  some  of  which  are  visible,  while 
many  of  which  ars  subtle  and  very  mysterious  in  their  nature." 


The  general  rule  of  avoiding  unfavourable  panchaka  has  certain 


exceptions.  When  an  election  is  to  do  with  occupation,  avoid  Raja 
Panchaka.  In  elections  bearing  on  house  building  avoid  both  Raja  and 
Agni  Panchakas.  In  regard  to  travel,  Chora  Panchaka  should  be 
rejected.  In  marriage  and  upanayanam,  Roga  and  Mrityu  Panchakas 
should  be  avoided.  Conversely  it  also  means  that  a panchaka  declared 
unsuitable  for  a particular  type  of  election  could  be  used  for  a different 
kind  of  election.  No  astrological  authority  has  specifically  approved  this 
step  but  by  implication,  we  can  assume  that  there  is  no  objection  if,  for 
instance,  we  ignore  raja  panchaka  for  travelling  or  marriage  or  roga 
panchaka  for  house-building.  As  far  as  possible,  it  is  advisable  to  avoid 
the  evil  of  panchaka  in  general  irrespective  of  its  definite  bearing  on  an 
election.  But  when  a more  auspicious  day  cannot  be  secured,  we  can 
resort  to  the  lesser  of  the  two  evils. 

As  regards  Tarabala  referred  to  above,  it  is  no  doubt  advisable  to  avoid 
a day  that  is  ruled  by  the  1st,  3rd;  5th  and  7th  constellations.  But  when 
the  day  is  otherwise  favourable,  only  the  negative  parts  of  these 
unfavourable  constellations  may  be  avoided.  Thus,  in  the  Janma,  Vipat, 
Pratyak  and  Naidhana  constellations,  the  first  7,  3,  8 and  6 ghatis 
respectively  may  be  considered  evil  and  avoided.  Thus,  a man  whose 
Janma  Nakshatra  is  Pushyami  can  undertake  a venture  on  a day  ruled 
by  Makha  (Vipat)  provided  he  avoids  the  first  seven  ghatis  of  the 
constellation.  The  stigma  attached  to  the  star  being  Vipat  no  longer 
holds  good.  Generally  these  exceptions  are  resorted  to  only  under 
special  circumstances  when  an  election  is  to  be  urgently  made  and 
when  the  undertaking  admits  of  no  delay. 

A day  ruled  by  one's  Janma  Nakshatra  is  ordinarily  held  to  be 
unfavourable  for  an  election.  But  in  regard  to  nuptials,  sacrifices,  first 
feeding,  agriculture,  upanayanam,  coronation,  buying  lands,  learning 
the  alphabet,  Janma  Nakshatra  is  favourable  without  exception.  But  it  is 
inauspicious  for  war,  sexual  union,  shaving,  taking  medical  treatment, 
travel  and  marriage.  For  a woman,  Janma  Nakshatra  would  be  quite 
favourable  for  marriage. 

There  are  several  technicalities  to  be  considered  in  the  selection  of 
auspicious  times  and  in  spite  of  the  apparent  inconsistencies  to  be 
found  in  the  opinions  expressed  by  different  classical  writers  on  this 
subject,  I have  endeavoured  to  give  the  easiest  and  what,  in  my  humble 
opinion,  are  the  most  reliable  principles  bearing  on  this  all-important 
subject. 


CHAPTER  IV 

Influence  of  Constellations 


The  whole  of  Muhurtha  or  for  that  matter,  the  whole  of  Hindu  astrology 
is  based  on  the  movements  of  planets  in  relation  to  the  constellations. 
The  wisdom  of  the  ancient  Indians  in  making  predictive  astrology, 
dependent  upon  the  fixed  zodiac,  is  being  increasingly  appreciated  by 
students  of  the  science.  The  question  of  zodiacal  influences  hinges  on 
the  fact  whether  the  star -points  or  constellations  with  which  the  Sun 
comes  into  line  from  day-to-day  derive  their  influences  from  that  body  or 
irrespective  of  the  shifting  position  of  the  Sun,  there  is  any  special  virtue 
attaching  to  these  star-points.  We  have  shown  with  incontrovertible 
evidence  in  several  of  our  articles  in  THE  ASTROLOGICAL  MAGAZINE 
that  the  stars  have  a decided  influence  on  all  human  affairs  and  we 
have  several  times  disproved  the  absurd  views  displayed  by  the  so- 
called  scientists  that  because  stars  are  removed  millions  and  billions  of 
miles  away  from  us,  there  cannot  be  any  connection  between  those 
gigantic  masses  and  the  living  human  beings.  These  electro -magnetic 
bodies  are  capable  of  discharging  different  kinds  of  energies 
manifesting  themselves  in  different  ways.  When  a constellation  like 
Bharani  (beta  Arietis)  is  held  to  be  constitutionally  unfit  for  certain  types 
of  elections;  it  means  that  the  vibrations  emanating  from  it  are 
destructive  in  character. 

I do  not  propose  to  discuss  here  the  astrological  influences  of  the 
various  constellations  elaborately.  I would  give  just  the  important  ones, 
mainly  based  on  BRIHAT  SAMHITA  and  leave  the  reader  to  refer  to 
more  standard  works  on  Muhurtha  for  further  details. 

The  28  constellations  (including  Abhijit  which  is  generally  ignored  in 
everyday  astrological  consultations)  are  presided  over  by  Aswini.  Yama, 
Agni.  Prajapati,  the  Moon,  Rudra,  Aditi,  Jupiter,  Serpent,  Pitrus  or 
manes,  Bhaga,  Aryaman,  Savita,  Swashta,  Vayu.lndragni,  Mitra,  Indra, 
Niruti,  Visvedewa,  Brahman,  Vishnu,  Vasu,  Varuna,  Ajaikapat, 
Ahirbudhnya  and  Pushan  respectively. 

Rohini,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra  are  supposed  to  be  fixed 
constellations  and  they  are  favourable  for  coronations,  laying  the 
foundations  of  cities,  sowing  operations,  planting  trees  and  other 
permanent  things. 


Chitta,  Anuradha,  Mrigasira  and  Revati  are  soft  constellations.  They  are 
good  for  wearing  new  apparel,  learning  dancing,  music  and  fine  arts, 
sexual  union  and  performance  of  auspicious  ceremonies. 

Aswini,  Pushya,  Hasta  and  Abhijit  are  light  constellations,  and  they  can 
be  selected  for  putting  ornamentation,  pleasures  and  sports, 
administering  medicine,  starting  industries  and  undertaking  travels. 

Moola,  Jyestha,  Aridra  and  Aslesha  are  sharp  in  nature  and  they  are 
favourable  for  incantations,  invoking  spirits,  for  imprisonment,  murders, 
and  separation  of  friends. 

Saravana,  Dhanishta,  Satabhisha,  Punarvasu  and  Swati  are  movable 
stars  and  they  are  auspicious  for  acquiring  vehicles,  for  gardening  and 
for  going  on  procession. 

Pubba,  Poorvashadha  and  Poorvabhadra,  Bharani  and  Makha  are 
dreadful  stars  and  they  a re  suitable  for  nefarious  schemes,  poisoning, 
deceit,  imprisonment,  setting  fire  and  other  evil  deeds. 

Krittika  and  Visakha  are  mixed  constellations  and  during  their 
influences,  works  of  day-to-day  importance  can  be  undertaken. 

Beginning  from  the  third  quarter  of  Dhanishta  and  ending  with  the  last 
part  of  Revati,  the  time  is  held  to  be  unsuitable  for  any  kind  of 
auspicious  work.  This  period  goes  under  the  special  name  of  Nakshatra 
Panchaka  and  when  these  stars  are  ruling,  one  should  avoid  journey 
towards  the  south,  house  repairing  or  renovation,  collecting  fuel  and 
cattle  fodder  or  acquiring  cots  and  beds. 

Of  all  the  twenty -eight  constellations,  the  pride  of  place  appears  to  have 
been  given  to  Pushya,  the  8th  star. 

The  constellation  of  Pushya  is  supposed  to  be  the  most  favourable  of  all 
the  28  constellations.  It  is  said  to  neutralise  almost  all  doshas  or  flaws 
arising  out  of  a number  of  adverse  combinations.  The  Rishis  go  to  the 
extent  of  saying  that  even  if  unfavourable  combinations  are  present  in 
the  birth  horoscope  hampering  ones  success  in  life,  and  the  ruling 
constellation  and  the  position  of  the  Moon  are  all  adverse,  Pushya  has 
the  power  of  neutralising  these  evil  forces  and  asserting  its  benefic 
nature.  In  spite  of  all  the  benefic  influences  attributed  to  Pushya,  it  is 
held  to  be  inauspicious  for  purposes  of  marriage.  There  may  be  an 


element  of  exaggeration  In  the  assertion  that  Pushya  is  capable  of 
modifying  all  the  evil  influences  present  in  an  election  chart  but  there  is 
no  doubt  whatsoever  that  it  is  a constellation  par  excellence  that  could 
be  universally  employed  for  all  purposes,  excepting  of  course  marriage. 

CHAPTER  V 

Special  Adverse  Yogas  and  their  Neutralisation 

The  farmers  of  the  astrological  rules  were  not  mere  theoreticians.  They 
were  practical  men  and  did  not  beleive  in  merely  cataloguing  their 
observations  for  academical  purposes.  Whilst  it  is  always  desirable  to  fix 
a Muhurtha  that  is  auspicious  by  all  standards  of  astrological  rules, 
there  would  sometimes  be  practical  difficulties  and  emergent  occasions 
which  admit  of  no  delay.  Therefore,  emphasis  is  laid  on  what  is  called 
gunabahulya  or  excess  of  good  and  dosha  swalpa  or  deficiency  of  evil. 
When  one  has  to  visit  a friend  or  a relation,  who  is  seriously  ill  in,  a far- 
off  place,  we  are  asked  not  to  attach  any  consideration  to  the 
astrological  factors.  Because  at  a moment's  notice  it  is  impossible  to  get 
a time  which  could  be  deemed  to  be  propitious  astrologically.  But  when 
one  is  to  go  on  a pilgrimage  or  a business  tour  or  for  a marriage,  one 
should  see  that  he  starts  under  influences  that  are  harmoniously 
disposed  towards  him. 

There  are  said  to  be  21  great  evils  (ekavimsati  mahadoshas)  which  are 
to  be  avoided  for  any  auspicious  work.  But  when  one  finds  it  difficult  to 
avoid  them  because  of  astrological  impossibility  or  circumstantial 
inability,  one  can  take  advantage  of  the  neutralising  combinations  which 
are  generally  supposed  to  act  as  antidotes.  We  may  just  make  a 
passing  reference  to  these  21  great  evils  for  the  information  of  the 
readers.  They  are:  - 

1 . Panchanga  Suddhi.  - We  have  already  said  that  a Panchanga 
consists  of  tithi,  vara,  nakshatra.  yoga  and  karana.  All  these  must  be 
auspicious.  In  regard  to  lunar  days,  the  4th,  6th,  8th,  12th  and  14th,  full 
and  new  moon  days  should  be  avoided.  In  regard  to  vara,  Thursday  and 
Friday  are  held  to  be  suitable  for  all  works.  Tuesday,  is  to  be  generally 
avoided  except  when  it  happens  to  be  the  10th,  12th  or  16th  day  of  the 
child's  birth  when  the  child's  Namakarana  (baptising  or  giving  name) 
may  be  performed.  Of  the  several  Nakshatras,  Bharani  and  Krittika 
should  be  avoided  for  all  auspicious  works  as  these  two  are  said  to  be 
presided  over  by  the  god  of  death  (Yama)  and  the  god  of  fire  (Agni) 


respectively.  In  urgent  cases  if  the  Lagna  could  be  fortified,  the  dosha 
due  to  nakshatra  may  get  neutralised.  The  last  parts  of  Aslesha, 

Jyeshta  and  Revati  should  also  be  avoided.  Coming  to  the  Yoga  (vide 
page  12)  the  6th  (Atiganda).  9th  (Soola).  10th  (Ganda),  17th  (Vyatipata) 
and  27th  (Vydhruti)  have  deleterious  effects  upon  events  which  are 
started  or  commenced  under  them.  - The  Karana  chosen  must  be 
appropriate  to  the  election  in  view.  Thus  Bava  is  auspicious  for  starting 
works  of  permanent  importance  while  Thaithula  is  propitious  for 
marriage.  Bhadra  is  unfit  for  any  good  work  but  is  eminently  suitable  for 
violent  and  cruel  deeds.  For  getting  initiation  into  kshudra  mantras 
Sakuni  Havana  is  propitious. 

Therefore,  Panchanga  Suddhi  means  a good  lunar  day,  a beneficial 
weekday,  an  auspicious  constellation,  a good  yoga  and  a fertilising 
Karana. 

2.  Surya  Sankramana.  - The  2nd  great  evil  is  Surya  Sankramana  or  the 
solar  ingress  into  different  zodiacal  signs.  When  the  Sun  is  about  to 
leave  one  sign  and  enter  another  there  seem  to  occur  certain 
disturbances  in  the  organisation  of  the  solar  forces  and  such  times  are 
not  recommended  for  any  good  work.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  held  to 
be  propitious  for  meditation,  initiation  into  secret  mantras  and 
performance  of  certain  religious  rites  which  are  held  to  purify  not  only 
the  bodily  electrical  discharges  but  also  the  mental  currents.  Sixteen 
ghatis  (6  hours  24  minutes)  both  before  and  after  the  entry  of  the  Sun 
into  a new  sign  should  be  rejected  for  all  new  works. 

3.  Karthari  Dosha.  - Karthari  means  scissors.  In  an  election,  when  two 
evil  planets  are  placed  on  either  side  of  the  Lagna,  the  combination 
goes  under  the  special  name  of  Karthari  Dosha  and  it  should  be 
rejected  for  good  work  particularly  in  regard  to  marriage. 

4.  Shashtashta  Riphagatha  Chandra  Dosha.  - The  Moon  should 
invariably  be  avoided  in  the  6th,  8th  and  12th  houses  from  the  Lagna 
rising  in  an  election  chart. 

5.  Sagraha  Chandra  Dosha.  - The  Moon's  association  with  any  other 
planet,  benefic  or  malefic,  should  be  avoided.  This  injunction  is  specially 
applicable  in  case  of  marriage. 

6.  Udayasta  Suddhi.  - The  Lagna  and  the  seventh  should  be  strong. 

The  Lagna  should  be  occupied  by  its  own  lord  and  the  Navamsa  Lagna 


by  its  own  lord  or  vice  versa  or  lord  of  Lagna  should  aspect  Navamsa 
Lagna  and  vice  versa.  Similarly  the  seventh  and  the  lord  of  the  seventh 
Bhava  should  be  favourably  disposed.  The  strength  of  Lagna  and  the 
seventh  is  necessary  in  all  elections  but  especially  so  in  regard  to 
marriage. 

7.  Durmuhurtha.  - Muhurtha  technically  means  48  minutes  or  2 ghatis  in 
terms  of  time.  A sidereal  day  consists  of  30  muhurthas.  The  1st  fifteen 
diurnal  muhurthas  named  are:  (1)  Rudra.  (2)  Ahi.  (3)  Mitra,,  (4)  Pitrii,  (5) 
Vasu,  (6)  Vara.  (7)  Vishwedeva,  (8)  Vidhi,  (9)  Sathamukhi,  (10) 
Puruhuta,  (H)Vahini,  (12)  Naktanchara,  (13)  Varuna,  (14)  Aryama  and 
(15)  Bhaga.  The  nocturnal  muhurthas  are:  (1)  Girisa,  (2)  Ajipada,  (3) 
Ahirbudhnya.  (4)  Pusha,  (5)  Aswi,  (6)  Yama,  (7)  Agni.  (8)  Vidhatru,  (9) 
Chanda,  (1 0)  Aditi,  (1 1 ) Jeeva,  (1 2)  Vishnu.  (1 3)  Yumigadyuti,  (1 4) 
Thyasthur  and  (15)  Samdram. 

In  regard  to  the  diurnal  muhurtha,  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  10th,  1 1th,  12th  and 
15th  are  inauspicious  while  in  nocturnai  muhurthas  the  1st.  2nd,  6th  and 
7th  are  inauspicious. 

In  calculating  the  muhurtha,  the  exact  length  of  day  and  night  should  be 
ascertained.  Each  muhurtha  is  said  to  last  for  48  minutes  (2  ghatis)  on 
the  assumption  that  the  duration  of  day  and  night  is  of  equal  proportion, 
viz.  30  ghatis,  or  12  hours.  If  the  length  of  day  is  28  ghatis,  then  each 
muhurtha  extends  for  1 ghati  and  52  vighatis  (20h  20s.  8). 

Apart  from  the  above  general  classification  of  good  and  bad  muhurthas, 
the  following  should  also  be  deemed  as  unpropitious  on  the  different 
weekdays.  Sunday  coinciding  with  the  14th  lunar  day  (Aryama);  Monday 
the  8th  (Vidhi)  and  the  12th  (Naktanchara);  Tuesday  the  4th  (Prtru)  and 
the  1 1th  (Vahni);  Wednesday  (Abhijit);  Thursday  the  12th  (Naktanchara) 
and  13th  (Varuna);  Fflday'the  4th  (Pitru)  and  the  8th  (Vidhi)  and 
Saturday  the  1st  (Rudra)  and  the  2nd  (Ahi). 

Particularly  in  marriages,  the  muhurthas  declared  above  as  inauspicious 
in  regard  to  weekdays  should  not  be  considered. 

8.  Gandanthara.  - The  last  2 ghatis  (48  minutes)  of  the  5th,  10th  and 
15th  (Full  Moon)  and  the  first  2 ghatis  of  the  6th,  1 1th  and  1st  (dark  half) 
lunar  days  go  under  tithigandanthara  and  they  should  be  rejected  for  all 
new  works.  Similarly,  the  last  2 degrees  of  Cancer.  Scorpio  and  Pisces 
and  the  first  2 degrees  of  Leo,  Sagittarius  and  Aries  are  inauspicious. 


The  last  ghatis  of  Aslesha,  Jyeshta,  Moola,  Revati  and  Aswini  and  the 
first  four  ghatis  of  Makha  should  be  avoided  as  injurious  for  good  work. 

Papashadvargs.  - Malefics  should  not  be  strong  in  shadvargas  in  an 
election  chart. 

10.  Bhrigu  Shatka.  - The  position  of  Venus  in  the  6th  is  injurious.  This  is 
especially  so  in  regard  to  marriage.  Even  when  Venus  is  exalted  and 
associated  with  benefics,  such  a disposition  is  not  approved. 

1 1 . Kujasthama:  - Mars  should  be  avoided  in  the  8th  house,  as  it 
indicates  destruction  of  the  object  in  view.  In  a marriage  election  chart. 
Mars  in  the  8th  is  unthinkable.  Even  if  Mars  is  otherwise  powerful,  he 
should  not  occupy  the  8th  house. 

12.  Ashtama  Lagna  Dosha.  - In  selecting  a time  for  marriage,  the  Lagna 
ascending  should  not  happen  to  be  the  8th  from  the  Janma  Lagna  of  the 
bride  and  the  bridegroom.  Suppose  the  would  be  husband  and  wife  are 
born  in  Aquarius  and  Capricorn  respectively.  At  the  time  of  marriage, 
the  ascending  Lagna  should  be  a sign  other  than  Virgo  or  Leo  as  these 
two  happen  to  be  the  8th  from  the  bridegroom  and  bride's  Janma 
Lagnas  respectively. 

13.  Rasi  Visha  Ghatika.  - Elsewhere  has  been  given  the  negative 
periods  of  different  Lagnas  (Lagna  Thyajya).  They  are  to  be  rejected  for 
all  auspicious  work. 

14.  Kunavamsa  Dosha.  - The  Lagna  selected  for  an  auspicious  work 
should  not  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  a malefic. 

15.  Varadosha.  - This  has  already  been  explained  on  page  26.  Certain 
weekdays  are  to  be  avoided  for  certain  special  activities. 

16.  Grahanothpatha  Dosha.  - The  constellations  in  which  the  eclipses 
appear  should  be  avoided,  and  in  regard  to  marriage,  such  a 
constellation  should  be  avoided  for  six  months. 

17.  Ekargala  Dosha.  - This  dosha  is  powerful  only  during  the  daytime. 
Affects  matters  started  under  certain  yogas  such  as  Vishkhambam.  We 
need  not  go  into  details  as  it  is  not  of  much  significance. 


18.  Krura  Samyuta  Dosha.  - The  constellation  occupied  by  the  Sun  at  a 


given  moment,  and  the  one  immediately  preceding  and  succeeding  it 
have  to  be  deemed  unpropitious  for  all  good  work  and  they  should  be 
rejected  for  purposes  of  marriage. 

19.  Akalagharjitha  Vrishti  Dosha.  - When  there  is  rainfall  and  thunder, 
out  of  season,  such  days  should  be  deemed  unfit  for  all  good  work. 

20.  Mahapatha  Dosha.  - When  the  Sun  and,  the  Moon  are  equally 
removed  from  the  equator  upon  the  same  side  of  it,  the  aspect  is  known 
as  Vyatipata,  which  indicates  excess  of  evil.  This  is  held  to  be 
unfavourable  for  all  good  work. 

21 . Vaidhruthi  Dosha  - This  is  also  an  evil  aspect  (yoga)  and  should  be 
avoided  in  all  favourable  activities. 

I have  given  above  a fairly  clear  description  of  the  'evils',  which  are 
generally  to  be  met  with  in  all  classical  works  on  Muhurtha.  The  reader 
should  not  get  scared  away  at  the  thought  of  these  large  number  of 
doshas  or  planetary  evils  which  are  to  be  avoided  if  one  is  to  elect  a 
proper  time  for  the  fruition  of  an  object  in  view.  Man  has  to  contend 
against  a stupendous  number  of  evil  agencies  or  discordant  vibrations 
released  by  the  planetary  bodies  and  each  of  these  mahadoshas  seems 
to  express  euphemestically  the  particular  types  of  evil  energies  which 
would  affect  adversely  particular  types  of  human  activities.  There  are 
several  exceptions  to  these  general  doshas.  One  should  always 
remember  that  in  electing  a suitable  moment  one  should  try  to  avoid  the 
major  doshas  by  fortifying  the  ascendant  and  taking  advantage  of  the 
exceptions  and  ignoring  the  minor  ones. 

The  following  combinations  are  held  to  neutralise  the  adverse  yogas 
mentioned  above: 

1 . The  lagnathyajya  referred  to  supra  prevails  only  on  particular  days  as 
per  details  below.  In  the  first  Navamsa  - Wednesday  and  Saturday.  In 
the  middle  Navamsa  - Monday  and  Friday.  In  the  last  Navamsa  - 
Tuesday,  Thursday  and  Sunday.  In  other  days  the  thyajyam  has  no 
significance. 

2.  Chandrashtama  shows  no  evil  when  the  Moon  is  waxing  and 
occupies  a benefic  sign  and  a benefic  Navamsa,  or  when  there  is 
Tarabala.  The  sting  is  lost  when  the  Moon  and  the  8th  lord  are  friends. 


3.  Tuesday  is  not  evil  after  midday. 

4.  The  aspects  attributed  to  Vyatipatam,  Vaidruti,  etc.,  become  defunct 
after  midday. 

5.  No  day  of  the  week  is  blemished  if  the  lord  thereof  is  strongly  placed 
in  the  election  chart. 

6.  Venus,  Mercury  or  Jupiter  in  the  ascendant  will  completely  destroy  all 
other  adverse  influences. 

7.  Jupiter  has  the  power  of  dispelling  all  the  evils  due  to  the  Lagna, 
Navamsa  and  malefic  aspects  and  render  the  time  highly  propitious. 

8.  The  mere  presence  of  the  Moon  or  the  Sun  in  the  1 1th  will  act  as  an 
antidote  for  other  evils  obtaining  in  the  horoscope. 

9.  If  the  angles  are  well  fortified,  evil  influences  are  countered. 

10.  A planet  exalted  in  Lagna  will  nullify  the  other  adverse  influences. 

1 1 . Jupiter  or  Venus  in  a kendra  (quadrant)  and  malefics  in  3,  6 or  1 1 
will  remove  alt  the  flaws  arising  on  account  of  unfavourable  weekday, 
constellation,  lunar  day  and  yoga. 

Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  the  most  important  question  in  Muhurtha  is  the 
fortification  of  Lagna  and  its  lord. 

CHAPTER  VI 

On  Certain  Special  Yogas 

When  a certain  weekday  coincides  with  a certain  asterism  and  a certain 
lunar  day,  it  becomes  specialty  auspicious  for  good  work.  In  this 
chapter,  I shall  give  a few  such  special  combinations  which  go  under  the 
special  distinction  of  Siddha  Yogas. 

Sunday  coinciding  with  the  1st,  4th,  6th,  7th  or  12th  lunar  day  and  ruled 
by  the  constellations  Pushya,  Hasta,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Moola, 
Sravana  or  Uttarabhadra  gives  rise  to  Siddha  Yoga. 

Monday  identical  with  the  2nd,  7th  or  12th  lunar  day  and  with  the 
constellations  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Chitta,  Sravana, 


Satabhisha,  Dhanishta  or  Poorvabhadra  produces  the  same  yoga. 

Tuesday  falling  on  a day  ruled  by  Aswini,  Mrigasira,  Chitta,  Anuradha, 
Moola,  Uttara,  Dhanishta  or  Poorvabhadra  gives  rise  to  Siddha  Yoga. 

Wednesday  coinciding  with  Bhadra  and  Java  and  with  the  constellations 
Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Aridra,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  or  Anuradha  generates 
Siddha  Yoga. 

Thursday  identical  with  the  4th,  5th,  7th,  9th,  13th  or  14th  lunar  day  and 
with  tne  asterisms  Makha,  Pushya,  PunarvasJ,  Swati.  Poorvashadha, 
Poorvabhadra,  Revati  or  Aswini  gives  rise  to  Siddha  Yoga. 

Friday  ruled  by  Aswini,  Bharani,  Aridra,  Uttara,  Chitta,  Swati, 
Poorvashadha  or  Revati  coinciding  with  Nanda  and  Bhadra  constitutes 
this  beneficial  yoga. 

Saturday  falling  on  a day  ruled  by  Swati,  Rohini,  Visakha,  Anuradha, 
Dhanishta  or  Satabhisha  and  with  lunar  days  Bhadra  and  Riktha 
generates  the  same  auspicious  yoga. 

A Friday  coinciding  with  Nanda  (1st,  6th  and  1 1th  lunar  days), 
Wednesday  identical  with  Bhadra  (2nd,  7th  and  12th  lunar  days), 
Tuesday  coinciding  with  Jaya  (3rd  8th  and  13th  lunar  days),  Saturday 
falling  on  a Riktha  tithi  (4th,  9th  and  14th  lunar  days),  and  Thursday 
falling  on  5th,  10th  or  15th  (Poorna)  lunar  days  constitute  Siddha  Yoga. 

Sunday  to  Saturday  respectively  coinciding  with  the  constellations 
Hasta,  Sravana,  Aswini,  Anuradha,  Pushya,  Revati  and  Rohini  will  give 
rise  to  Amita  Siddha  Yoga. 

The  above  special  yogas  can  be  applied  with  advantage  to  important 
elections  and  if  in  addition  10  the  general  strength  of  the  day  due  to  a 
special  yoga,  the  Lagna  is  also  rendered  strong,  chances  of  success  of 
the  enterprise  would  be  by  far  the  greatest. 

CHAPTER  VII 
Pre-Natal  Ceremonies 

Before  the  actual  birth  of  a child,  three  important  ceremonies  are 
enjoined  to  be  performed.  They  are  nuptials  (Nisheka),  consummation 
(Garbhadana)  and  Pumsavana  (change  of  sex). 


Nisheka  is  used  to  denote  the  first  sexual  contact,  while  Garbhadana 
has  reference  to  the  subsequent  defloratiohs.  Almost  ail  the  ancient 
works  on  Muhurtha  start  from  Namakarana  - the  name-giving  ceremony 
after  the  birth  of  a child-but  we  start  from  consummation  as  it  is  actually 
the  beginning  of  the  pre-natal  existence  of  the  child.  Sexual  union, 
pregnancy  and  reproduction  of  human  species  are  the  essentials  on 
which  the  world  exists.  Sexual  union  should  never  be  based  upon 
simple  sense  gratification.  There  is  a sacredness  about  sexual 
functions,  and  when  moral  and  spiritual  considerations  are  not 
respected  and  brought  into  play;  the  result  will  be  most  unsatisfactory 
and  alt  sorts  of  undesirable  progeny  would  be  the  products  of 
promiscuous  cohabitation.  According  to  Prof.  B.  Suryanarajn  Rao  men 
and  women  are  bundles  of  electricity.  When  they  are  brought  together 
sexually  a series  of  electrical  currents  would  be  released  which  may 
react  on  them  favourably  or  adversely  depending  upon  the  harmonious 
or  discordant  nature  of  the  vibrations  released.  Therefore  the  first  sexual 
act  should  not  be  treated  lightly  and  should  be  done  only  when 
planetary  combinations  are  favourably  disposed.  Books  on  ancient 
Sexology  and  Astrology  reveal  that  to  indulge  in  coitus  during  the  first 
four  days  of  menses  will  lead  to  serious  evil  effects  as  the  whole 
physiological  and  nervous  system  of  the  woman  would  be  in  a state  of 
tension  owing  to  the  almost  continuous  discharge  of  blood.  So  the  first 
four  days  of  menses  should  be  avoided.  Copulation  on  the  5th  day 
tends  to  give  rise  to  a daughter.  In  general,  sexual  union  on  odd  days 
indicates  birth  of  female  children  while  on  even  days,  the  birth  of  male 
children  is  indicated.  In  the  first  instance,  sexual  union  is  highly 
recommended  on  the  6th  day  of  the  menses  as  it  is  supposed  to  ensure 
not  only  happiness  to  the  couple  but  also  the  birth  of  a dutiful  and 
intelligent  son. 

The  constellations  Sravana,  Rohini,  Anuradha,  Swati,  Revati,  Moola, 
Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra.  Satabhisha  are  highly  favourable 
for  nuptials.  Pushyami,  Dhanishta.  Mrigasira,  Aswini,  Chitta.  Punarvasu 
are  ordinary.  The  rest  of  constellations  are  to  be  rejected. 

Monday,  Wednesday.  Thursday  and  Friday  are  auspicious  days  while 
Saturday,  Tuesday  and  Sunday  should  not  be  considered  at  all. 

All  lunar  days-except  the  4th,  8th,  9th,  14th,  Full  Moon  and  New  Moon 
are  good.  The  favourable  signs  are  Taurus  to  Libra  and  Pisces.  The 
birth  star  (Janma  Nakshatra),  the  10th  star  (Anu  Janma)  and  the  19th 
star  (Thri  Janma)  should  be  avoided. 


At  the  time  of  nuptials,  the  8th  house  should  be  occupied  by  no  planet. 
Subject  to  this  proviso,  even  Sagittarius  and  Aquarius  may  be  selected 
as  auspicious. 

Pumsavana.  - This  means  change  of  sex.  The  Hindus  had  long  ago 
known  the  processes  whereby  the  sex  of  the  foetus  could  be  changed 
by  performing  certain  remedies  and  by  administering  certain  medicines 
when  sex  differentiation  is  about  to  set  in.  The  possibility  of  change  of 
sex  long  known  to  the  Hindus  was  being  ridiculed  by  Western  scientists. 
But  during  the  last  3 or  4 decades,  the  opinion  of  the  scientists 
underwent  a gradual  change  and  most  of  them  now  admit  such  a 
possibility.  For  the  information  of  the  reader,  t may  just  make  a few 
observations  of  modern  medical  men  on  this  all-important  question. 

Professor  Thury  first  started  a theory  about  the  possibility  of  changing 
the  sex  of  the  foetus  in  the  womb.  This  was  taken  up  by  Professor 
Unterberger.  Bernard  Macfadden  has  reached  certain  conclusions 
regarding  the  predetermination  of  the  sex  with  a success  claimed  in  90 
per  cent  of  cases  experimented.  According  to  the  theory  of  Thury  "the 
biogenetic  condition,  prevailing  in  the  female  organism  in  the  beginning 
of  the  interval  between  two  menstrual  periods  is  favourable  to  girls. 
Towards  the  end  of  this  interval,  shortly  before  the  new  period,  it  is 
favourable  to  boys.  In  between,  the  chances  are  even".  It  is  possible 
that  the  chemistry  of  the  mother  undergoes  natural  changes  at  certain 
times  which  correspond  to  the  condition  of  alkalinity  on  acidity  created 
artificially  by  Unterberger  with  the  aid  of  bicarbonate  or  lactic  acid. 

There  are,  according  to  Davenport,  probably  four  hundred  theories  of 
sex  determination  promulgated  during  the  last  two  or  three  hundred 
years.  One  theory  generally  accepted  by  biologists  maintains  that  sex  is 
determined  by  the  so-called  X chromosomes,  in  the  female  there  are 
two  of  these  chromosomes.  In  the  male  there  is  only  one.  Professor 
Blchm  suggested  that  the  male  chromosomes  move  more  quickly  in 
alkaline  solution  than  the  chromosomes  which  carry  the  feminine 
principle.  A teaspoonful  of  bicarbonate  of  soda  or  one  spoonful  of  lactic 
acid  may  thus  determine  the  sex  of  the  child.  Generally  1 05  boys  are 
born  for  every  1 00  girls.  The  mortality  among  the  boys  is  somewhat 
greater.  It  has  been  found  that  after  great  and  destructive  wars,  where 
men  are  killed  on  a large  scale,  the  number  of  male  births  increases. 
Nature  thus  restores  the  balance  of  sexes.  We  have  known  parents, 
some  of  them  longing  for  girls  while  others  want  boys  for  keeping  up 
their  family  traditions  and  for  continuance  of  their  lines.  This  will  be  so 


specially  in  cases  of  inheritance  and  succession  to  thrones  and  large 
landed  and  financial  estates.  Many  wars  and  bloodshed  were  the  results 
of  kings  and  queens  having  no  sons  to  succeed  them.  In  almost  all  the 
countries  the  dynasties  were  kept  up  through  sons.  Matriarchy  forms  an 
exception. 

It  was  found  out  by  experiment  that  a high  acid  secretion  was  frequently 
responsible  for  sterility  in  the  female.  When  douche  were  applied  in  the 
form  of  sodium  bicarbonate,  where  there  were  no.  pathological  changes 
in  either  husband  or  wife  the  results  were  most  gratifying.  The 
pregnancy  developed  after  the  next  period  and  in  every  case  the  child 
was  a boy.  Professor  Unterberger  observes  "that  the  most  important 
thing  appears  to  be  the  fact  that  the  characteristics  of  the  female  organs 
exercise  a great  influence  on  the  determination  of  the  sex  which  strange 
to  say  has  been  ignored  heretofore".  Professor  Nicolai  Konstantinovitch 
of  Moscow  discovered  an  electric  treatment  which  separates  and 
segregates  the  male  and  female  spermatozoa.  It  is  said  that  children  of 
either  sex  may  be  obtained  by  using  chromosomes  of  the  opposite  sex 
in  artificial  impregnation.  Natural  spermatozoa  are  deposited  in  the 
curved  end  of  the  tube  filled  with  a physiological  solution.  A slight 
electrical  current  draws  the  male  and  female  cells  opposite  ends  of  the 
tubes.  The  male  spermatozoa  are  drawn  to  the  anodes  or  the  side  wh- 
,re  the  current  enters  the  tube,  and  the  female  sperms  to  the  cathodes, 
where  the  current  leaves.  Macfadden  says  "conception  time  with 
reference  to  the  menstrual  cycle  normally  runs  its  course  in  twenty-eight 
days  and  so  corresponds  in  length  to  the  lunar  month". 

Here  is  a feminine  physiological  habit  which  in  some  ways  at  present 
clearly  understood  closely  corresponds  to  the  movements  of  the  Moon. 
The  theory  is,  that  if  fertilised  when  first  discharged  from  the  ovary  the 
ovum  is  female  in  tendency  while  later  as  the  ovum  ages  it  becomes 
male,  so  that  fertilisation  between  the  3rd  and  the  5th  days  after 
menstruation  is  liable  to  produce  a girl,  between  the  5th  and  8th  days,  a 
boy  or  a girl,  and  between  the  8th  and  12th  days  a boy.  We  have 
evidence  that  certain  physiological  habits  curiously  correspond  to  the 
lunar  daily  cycles  even  as  the  habit  of  the  menstruation,  a sex  function 
corresponds  to  the  lunar  monthly  cycle. 

It  has  been  suggested  by  the  mighty  Darwin  that  since  life  apparently 
originated  on  the  beaches  of  primordial  sea  where  it  was  alternately 
covered  and  uncovered  by  the  lides,  through  countless  ages,  certain  life 
rhythms  and  physiological  habits  were  formed  in  all  living  creatures  to 


correspond  with  those  tidal  rhythms,  which  irr-their  turn  were  regulated 
by  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  The  primitive  cell,  which  was  the  cradle  of  the 
life-force,  at  that  time  went  through  alternating  period  of  activity  and 
quiescence.  The  scientific  name  for  these  two  physiological  phases  is 
Katabolism  and  Anabolism.  Physiologically  Anabolism  and  Katabolism 
correspond  to  maleness  and  femaleness.  These  facts  lead  to  some 
interesting  conclusions  about  sex  as  possibly  determined  not  merely  by 
the  time  of  the  lunar  month,  but  by  the  time  of  the  lunar  day  at  which 
conception  takes  place.  Here  all  the  greatest  scientists  on  matters  of 
conception  and  sex  formation  are  agreed  on  the  physiological  effects  of 
cycles  of  lunar  days  and  lunar  months. 

We  shall  now  quote  from  our  astrological  literature,  what  they  have 
unanimously  said  about  the  appearances  of  menses,  how  the  foetus 
develops  in  the  womb,  in  what  month  the  sex  is  formed,  how  the  sex  of 
the  unborn  child  in  the  womb  can  be  known  and  by  what  methods  the 
sex  of  the  child  may  be  changed  as  per  desire  of  the  parents. 

Occassionally  one  reads  in  papers  about  the  reversal  or  change  of  sex 
to  a certain  degree  even  in  adults.  This  phenomenon  has  been  actually 
witnessed  by  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao  and  of  late  it  is  becoming 
common.  In  the  history  of  science  the  ancient  Hindus  occupy  a foremost 
place  because  thousands  of  years  ago.  they  had  anticipated  and  in  fact 
achieved  what  to  the  moderns  appear  as  marvels  of  biology.  Of  course, 
it  is  a fashion  with  those  who  have  received  the  European  system  of 
education  of  laugh  at  things  they  cannot-explain  with  the  aid  of  their  own 
pet  theories. 

Charaka,  the  great  Hindu  physician,  has  dwelt  at  length  with  the 
question  of  change  of  sex.  The  ancients  had  not  only  studied  the  theory 
but  they  have  given  us  practical  rules  whereby  the  sex  of  the  unborn 
child  in  the  womb  may  be  known  in  advance  and  changed,  if  so  desired. 
Ceremonies  are  actually  laid  down  in  theVedas  for  performance  by  the 
father  and  the  mother  with  a view  to  give  the  child  in  the  womb  the  sex 
that  is  desired.  These  rites  are  called  pwnsavana.  The  etymology  of  the 
word  is:  pung  (male)  syate  (is  produced)  anena  (by  this);  in  other  words 
the  male-producing  rite.  These  rites  are  performed  even  unto  this  day 
by  every  orthodox  Hindu.  Pumsavana  is  performed  just  after  the 
expiration  of  three  months  from  date  of  conception. 


Before  giving  further  details  about  Pumsavana  Jet  us  bring  to  the 
attention  of  the  readers  an  interesting  phenomenon  which  recently 


happened  in  Europe.  Andreas  Sparre,  a Danish  painter,  married  at  the 
age  of  20,  a student  artist  studying  in  a like  academy  as  his  in  Paris. 
They  had  a "happy  life  for  some  time.  A few  years  later  Andreas  Sparre 
happened  to  dress  up  in  fun  as  a woman.  The  clothes  suited  him  and  he 
looked  like  a girl.  One  of  his  friends  called  him  Lili  and  he  liked  this 
name.  Soon  afterwards  Andreas  began  to  feel  that  Lili  was  after  all  a 
real  individual  - a separate  personality,  existing  within  himself. 

Gradually,  this  second  personality  pushed  to  the  background,  his 
maleness.  Andreas  experienced  bleeding  from  the  mouth  and  nose  and 
this  was  regarded  as  a form  of  menstruation.  Of  course  there  was  a 
psychological  change  too  that  he  was  becoming  moreand  more 
feminine.  With  the  passing  of  time  a conviction  grew  in  his  mind  that 
though  male  in  his  outward  form,  internally  he  possessed  the  female 
sexual  organs.  Physicians  and  surgeons  whom  he  consulted  could  not 
offer  any  explanation  for  his  dual  personality.  At  last  he  consulted  a 
German  specialist  who  declared  after  a careful  examination  that 
Andreas  possessed  female  sexual  organs  within  himself.  After  this  he 
was  operated  upon  by  Prof  Gebherd  and  after  the  operation  the 
attending  nurses  remarked  to  Andreas  that  his  voice  had  completely 
changed  and  that  it  was  a shrill  woman's  voice.  Then  cigarettes  and 
cigars  nauseated  him  and  even  his  handwriting  turned  feminine.  In  this 
first  operation  the  malesex  glands  were  completely  removed  and 
Andreas  Sparre  was  no  longer  a man.  After  the  second  operation  Crete, 
the  wife  of  Andreas,  wrote  as  follows  in  her  diary:  - 

"Not  until  a few  hours  later  did  I team  what  had  happened  inside-a 
human  being  who  was  born  a man,  who  was  my  husband,  my  friend, 
my  comrade  had  now  become  a woman,  a complete  woman." 

"But  the  thought  which  haunts  me  is  that  though  Andreas  may  now  be 
extinguished,  and  though  Liti  may  have  risen  like  a phoenix  from  the 
ashes,  yet  m the  world  outside  Andreas  is  still  living  in  the  eyes  of  the 
law,  and  I am  his  wife.  Who  is  capable  of  grasping  this  horror,  this 
fantastic  idea,  this  unique  happening." 

What  are  we  to  think  of  this  strange  and  tragic  case  of  Andhreas  Sparre 
- a case  unique  m medical  history.  The  case  of  Obalamma  becoming 
Obalachari  (vide  Female  Horoscopy  by  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao)  is 
also  equally  interesting. 

Though  medically  it  is  impossible  to  distinguish  sex  in  the  embryo, 
astrologically  it  is  possible  to  know  beforehand  - based  on  the 


conception  Lagna-whether  the  child  would  be  male  or  female.  Doctors 
also  opine  that  even  in  the  most  normal  and  unambiguous  individual  the 
rudiments  of  the  organs  of  the  other  sex  are  present  throughout  life. 
Pumsavana  means  not  only  rites  but  also  administering  of  certain 
medicines.  Who  knows,  the  proper  performance  of  Pumsavana  may 
enable  us  to  change  sexes  of  even  adults,  because  the  medicines 
accompanied  by  mantras  may  act  on  the  glandular  secretions  and 
change  the  very  nature  of  such  secretion.  The  cases  of  Andreas  and 
Obalamma  suggest  that  change  of  sex  is  possible  and  that  ancient 
Hindus  when  they  talked  of  this  phenomenon  were  not  merely  guessing 
but  were  treading  on  solid  and  scientific  ground*. 

A persual  of  the  various  texts  in  Sanskrit  bearing  on  astrology  and 
medicine  reveals  that  Pumsavana  is  closely  connected  with  the 
planetary  influences  on  embroynic  development.  All  the  phases  of  the 
union  of  the  virile  spermatozoan  with  the  mature  ovum  called 
impregnation,  the  fixation  of  the  impregnated  ovum,  called  conception, 
and  the  development  of  the  foetus  are  governed  by  the  Moon  and  other 
planets. 

No  birth  takes  place  by.  chance.  In  most  cases,  impregnation  follows 
very  shortly  after  coitus  and  it  is  the  time  of  coitus  that  is  generally  taken 
according  to  Hindu  Astrology  for  the  Nisheka  or  conception  horoscope. 
The  period  of  gestation  is  the  time  which  elapses  between  the 
conception  and  partruition.  during  which  the  child  first  as  embryo,  then 
as  foetus  is  developing  in  the  womb.  Beginning  with  the  third  week,  the 
head  bend  in  the  embryo  is  quite  marked  which  gradually  increases  as 
development  goes  on,  and  at  the  end  of  the  third  week  the  heart  and  all 
the  organs  have  been  laid  down  and  limbs  begin  to  make  their 
appearance  as  small  buds,  not  unlike  those  of  the  frog,  and  the  embryo 
closely  resembles  any  other  mammalian  embryo  at  a corresponding 
stage.  The  chief  changes  in  the  first  month  (governed  of  course  by 
Venus)  are  the  formation  of  the  face  and  external  ear,  and  the 
development  of  the  limbs'  The  eyes,  nasal  pits,  maxillary  processes, 
ears  and  nose  are  now  visible. 

In  the  second  month  of  pregnancy-ruled  by  Mars  - the  plasm  is 
enveloped  by  the  amnion.  Mars  brings  the  development  of  the 
membranes  and  strong  expansion  of  them.  The  brain  begins  to  develop, 
the  head  becomes  considerably  larger  and  the  human  characters  are  ell 
established.  The  embryo  may  now  be  spoken  of  as  the  foetus,  which 
has  passed  its  quadruped  stage. 


Now  we  come  to  the  third  month  influenced  largely  by  Jupiter  - the 
month  in  which  Pumsavana  has  to  be  performed  if  one  desires  to  have 
a son  born  to  him.  ft  Is  In  the  third  month  the  differentiation  of  sex  is 
brought  about,  as  also  the  development  of  the  genitals.  Jupiter  a 
masculine  planet,  presides  over  this  month.  Thus  it  will  be  seen  that  in 
the  selection  of  the  time  for  performing  Pumsavana  the  ancients  had  in 
view  very  scientific  reasons.  As  difference  of  sex  occurs  in  the  third 
month,  the  medicines  and  mantras  administered  under  the  influence  of 
certain  constellations  would  certainly  be  capable  enough  to  change  the 
sex  to  the  desire  of.  the  individual  concerned.  Without  caring  to  bestow 
serious  thought  on  such  questions,  the  moderner  is  apt  to  dismiss  the 
whole  thing  as  the  product  of  superstition. 

We  shall  now  give  a few  hints  from  the  famous  Charaka  Samhita  and  it 
is  for  readers  to  make  use  of  such  hints  to  their  own  advantage. 

Charaka  says:  "Instructions  will  be  laid  down  about  those  Vedic  rites  by 
which  the  sex  of  the  child  (in  the  womb)  before  its  manifestation  may  be 
changed.  Verily  of  rites  duly  performed  and  characterised  by  propriety  of 
time  and  place,  the  capacity  to  produce  desirable  fruits  is  ordained. 
Observing  that  a woman  has  concieved,  Pumsavana  should  be 
administered  to  her  before  the  manifestation  of  the  sex  of  the  child  in 
the  womb. 

"Obtaining  two  unbroken  buds  from  two  twigs  procured  from  the  eastern 
and  northern  aides  of  a banian  (Pious  indica,  Linn.)  growing  in  a 
cowpen,  as  also  a single  grain  of  paddy  and  a single  seed  of  Masha 
Phaseolus  radiatus  Roxb.)  both  well  developed,  or  two  seeds  of  white 
mustard,  and  throwing  them  into  a quantity  of  curds,  the  woman  (that 
has  conceived)  should  be  made  to  drink  it  under  the  constellation  of 
Pushya."  Another  Pumsavanam  medicine  is  the  following:  - 

The  kalka  or  paste  of  (a)  jeevaka(*1 ) (b)  rfshabhaka(*2)  (c) 

Apamarga(*3)  or  (d)  Sahachara(*4)  or  of  each  if  desirable  - should  be 
boiled  with  milk  and  given  to  the  woman  to  drink. 

1 . Jeeaka  Is  no  longer  identifiable  or  procurable.  Hindu  doctors  find 
substitute  In  Guduchi  or  Tinospora  cordifolia.  Miqs. 


2.  This  is  also  not  Identifiable.  The  substitute  to  Vanggatochana  or 
bamboo  manoa. 


3.  Achyaranihes,  Linn. 

4.  Barlenia  cristala,  Linn. 

"Or,  the  likeness  of  a man.  or  very  small  proportions,  made  of  gold,  or 
silver  or  iron,  made  red-hot  in  fife  and  then  dipped  into  a measure  of 
curds,  or  milk,  or  water,  should  be  swallowed  without  leaving  any 
remnant,  under  the  influence  of  the  constellation  Pushyami.  Linder  the 
same  nakshatra  of  Pushymi,  the  woman  may  be  made  to  inhale  the  hot 
vapour  of  a cake  {pishta  or  pishtaka}  that  is  being  baked  (on  the  fire) 
and  then  dissolving  that  cake  in  a measure  of  water,  the  mixture  should 
be  cast  over  the  threshold  of  the  door.  This  water  the  woman  should 
then,  using  a stick  of  cotton,  apply  to  her  Tight  nostril." 

If  the  above  remedies  are  administered  under  the  favourable  and 
auspicious  influences  of  constellation,  the  sex  in  the  womb  of  the 
woman  is  supposed  to  change.  The  subject  is  vast  and  we  shall  again 
recur  to  this  on  a subsequent  occasion.  Who  has  studied  and  who  has 
tested  all  these  methods?  Why  label  them  as  useless  and  unscientific 
when  you  do  not  know  that  they  are. 

The  ceremony  of  Pumsavanam  should  be  celebrated  in  the  3rd  month 
when  signs  of  pregnancy  are  evident.  All  lunar  days  except  the  4th,  6th, 
8th.  9th,  12th.  14th.  Full  Moon  and  New  Moon  days  are  good. 

All  signs  except  Gemini,  Cancer  and  Virgo  are  auspicious.  Virgo  should 
be  avoided  as  it  is  specially  adverse. 

Monday.  Wednesday,  Thursday,  and  Friday  are  beneficial.  The  8th 
house  from  the  ascendant  should  be  vacant.  The  Moon's  presence  in 
Lagna  or  the  12th  and  the  ascendant  being  aspected  by  Venus  brings 
on  prosperity.  Beneficsshould  be  disposed  in  quadrants  or  trines. 

There  is  another  ceremony  named  Seemantha  immediately  foltowtng 
Pumsavansm.  being  performed  In  the  5th  or  7th  month  of  pregnancy. 
This  is  ortfatned  only  in  regard  to  first  conceptions.  If  the  time-schedule 
cannot  be  kept  up.  it  should  not  be  abandoned,  but  the  function  must  be 
performed  at  least  before  delivery.  This  is  the  view  of  sage  Sankha. 

For  Seemantha,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Pushyami,  Uttara, 
Uttarashadha,  Hasta,  Sravana  and  Revati  are  auspicious.  Some  are  of 
the  opinion  that  under  unavoidable  circumstances,  even  Aswini, 


Anuradna  and  Moola  maybe  deemed  auspicious.  The  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th, 
14th  (unar  days  and  New  Moon  day  must  be  avoided.  When  the  Moon 
is  dignified  Full  Moon  day  is  hot  condemned.  Sunday.  Tuesday  and 
Saturday  should  be  avoided.  The  rest  of  the  weekdays  are  good.  All 
signs  except  Leo  and  Scorpio  are  auspicious.  The  8th  house  from  the 
ascendant  must  be  free.  Generally  speaking,  the  3rd,  8th,  7th,  10th  and 
22nd  constellations  should  be  avoided.  The  Moon  should  not  be  in  the 
8th  house.  So  far  as  this  particular  ceremony  is  concerned,  the  month 
ranks  first  in  importance.  Hence,  even  If  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
combust,  such  a circumstance  may  be  ignored. 

CHAPTER  VIII 
Post-Natal  Ceremonies 

Namakarana  or  naming  tha  child.  - The  proper  day  for  this  ceremony 
would  be  the  1 0th,  1 2th  or  1 6th  day  of  the  child's  birth.  If  this  is  not 
possible,  then  an  auspicious  day  must  be  fixed  for  the  purpose. 

Anuradha,  Punarvasu,  Makha,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra, 
Satabhisha,  Swati,  Dhanishta,  Sravana,  Rohini,  Aswini,  Mrigasira, 
Revati,  Hasta  and  Pushya  are  auspicious. 

The  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th,  12th,  14th  lunar  days;  Full  Moon  and  New  Moon 
should  be  avoided. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  good.  Other  weekdays 
are  not  good.  As  far  as  possible,  the  Lagna  roust  be  rendered  strong 
and  the  8th  house  should  be  unoccupied.  Fixed  signs  are  preferable 
and  common  signs  are  good  when  occupied  by  benefics. 

If  Jupiter  occupies  a kendra  or  thrikona  and  a malefic  is  in  the  1 1th  the 
time  is  held  to  be  very  auspicious.  Another  equally  propitious 
combination  ie  the  time  when  the  Lagna  falls  in's  benefic  sign  with  a 
malefic  in  the  3rd,  Venus  in  12th  and  the  Moon  in  a dignified  bosrtion. 

Generally  the  name  to  be  given  to  a male  child  should  consist  of  an 
even  number  of  letters  (e.g.,  Rama,  Krishna,  etc.),  while  a female  child 
should  be  given  a name  containing  uneven  number  of  letters  e.g., 
Parvati,  Janaki,  etc.).  The  name  must  also  be  appropriate  to  the  ruling 
star. 


Cradling.  - The  best  time  for  this  would  be  the  1 0th,  1 2th,  1 6th,  or  the 
22nd  day  after  its  birth. 

First  Feeding  on  Rico  (Annaprasana).  - Let  the  first  feeding  on  rice  be 
done  in  the  6th,  8th,  9th,  or  12th  month  on  days  ruled  by  Aswini, 
Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Dhanishta,  Pushyami,  Hasta,  Swati,  Anuradha, 
Sravana,  Satabhisha,  Uttara,  and  Chitta,  avoiding  the  usual 
unfavourable  lunar  days.  The  10th  house  must  be  unoccupied.  The  first 
feeding  should  not  be  done  in  the  constellation  of  Aridra,  Krittika, 
Jyeshta,  Bharani,  Aslesha,  Poorvashadha  and  Poorvabhadra. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  good.  Aries.  Scorpio 
and  Pisces  are  inauspicious.  Mercury,  Mars  and  Venus  should  not 
occupy  respectively  the  7th,  8th  and  9th  houses.  Mercury,  Jupiter  or 
Venus  in  Lagna  is  highly  commendable.  No  malefic  should  occupy  the 
ascendant. 

The  most  important  factor  in  this  function  is  the  month;  hence  one 
should  not  mind  even  if  Jupiter  and  Venus  are  combust. 

Ear  Boring  (Karnavedha).  - This  should  be  done  on  the  12th  oil  6th  day 
of  the  birth  of  the  child  or  in  the  6th,  7th  or  8th  month,  either  in  the 
forenoon  or  in  the  afternoon  but  never  during  night.  A day  ruled  by  two 
asterisms  or  two  lunar  days  is  not  propitious  as  also  the  other  lunar 
days  usually  declared  as  inauspicious. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  good.  At  the  time  of 
boring  the  ears,  the  8th  house  should  be  unoccupied,  Aquarius,  Leo  and 
Scorpio 

Tonsure  (Chowlam)  - The  learned  say  that  Chowlam  is  a very  important 
karma  because  it  involves  the  first  cutting  of  hair  which  means 
discharge  of  electrical  currents  from  the  child  for  the  first  time.  The 
ceremony  when  properly  done  is  said  to  prolong  the  life  of  the  child.  It 
should  not  be  done  when  the  mother  of  the  child  is  pregnant.  Chowlam 
may  be  performed  in  the  3rd  or  5th  year  when  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
free  from  combustion  and  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  Tropic  of  Cancer.  The 
bright  fortnight  is  said  to  give  longevity  while  the  dark  fortnight  is 
supposed  to  affect  the  health. 

The  2nd,  3rd,  6th,  7th,  10th,  11th  and  13th  lunar  days  are  good.  The 
4th,  1st,  6th,  8th,  9th,  14th  and  New  and  Full  Moon  days  should  be 


rejected. 


Punarvasu,  Mrigasira,  Dhanishta,  Sravana,  Revati,  Pushya,  Chitta, 
Aswini,  Hasta  are  favourable;  Swati,  Rohini,  Satabhisha,  Uttara, 
Uttarabhadra,  Uttarashadha  are  ordinary.  Tonsure  should  always  be 
done  in  the  forenoon. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  good. 

Cancer,  Virgo,  Gemini,  Pisces,  Libra,  Taurus  and  Capricorn  rising  give 
rise  to  good  results.  The  rest  are  not  beneficial.  But  they  can  be 
employed  provided  benefics  occupy  the  Lagna  and  the  Lagna  is 
otherwise  strong.  But  Aquarius  should  be  rejected  at  any  cost,  no  matter 
how  powerful  it  might  be.  Let  the  benefics  occupy  the  4th,  5th,  7th,  9th, 
10th  and  1 1th  and  malefics  the  3rd,  6th  and  1 1th.  The  8th  house  must 
femain  unoccupied.  The  7th  house  should  not  be  occupied  by  either  the 
Sun  or  Mars  or  preferably  by  any  malefic. 

Commencing  Education  (Aksharabhyasa}.  - Alphabet  is  a crude 
translation  of  the  word  'Akshara'.  Akshara  means  that  which  cannot  be 
destroyed  and  therefore  akshara  simply  indestructible  forms  of  sound 
vibrations. 

When  such  sound  vibrations  are  first  put  into  the  child's  ears,  they  must 
be  such  as  to  give  the  child  a good  chance  of  calling  out  the  latent 
energies  in  him  or  her  so  that  the  course  of  training  may  run  smoothly 
and  to  his  best  advantage. 

The  most  propitious  period  for  commencing  education  is  the  6th  day  in 
the  5th  month  of  the  5th  year.  The  following  days  constellations  are 
good:  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday;  Aswini,  Punarvasu, 
Aridra,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Swati,  Sravana  and  Revati. 

Movable  and  common  signs  are  good. 

Forenoon  and  noon  are  preferable.  The  8th  house  should  be 
unoccupied. 

Mercury,  Venus,  Jupiter  in  the  9th  counteracts  all  evil  influences. 

Investiture  of  Sacred  Thread  (Upanayanam)*.  - This  is  a ceremony  in 
which  spiritiual  instructions  are  given  by  authorised  persons  to  give 


spiritual  eye  to  the  boy  by  which  his  internal  vision  is  brought  closer  to 
the  Universal  light  or  God.  This  ceremony  is  peculiar  to  the  Hindus.  But 
as  the  name  indicates,  any  section  of  the  human  society,  whether  Hindu 
or  not,  may  take  advantage  of  these  valuable  precepts  and  begin  to  give 
their  children  the  religious  instruction  most  suitable  to  their  countries, 
castes  and  traditions,  Upanayanam  should  be  performed  in  the  5th  or 
the  8th  year.  If  this  is  not  possible,  the  ceremoney  should  be  gone 
through  before  the  age  of  1 6 In  case  of  Brahmins  and  20  to  24  in  regard 
to  other  sects  of  the  Hindus. 

* Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao's  Sukla  and  Promoduta. 

The  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Jupiter  represent  symbolically  the  father, 
mother  and  lire-force.  Therefore,  the  three  planets  should  be  well 
disposed  to  the  ascendant  at  the  timeof  Upanayanam. 

The  best  season  is  when  the  Sun  is  in  his  northern  course  (between 
Capricorn  and  Gemini).  The  lunar  months  of  Magha,  Phalguna,  Chaitra 
and  Vaisakha  are  good.  The  2nd,  3rd,  5th,  7th,  10th  and  13th  lunar  days 
in  the  bright  half  and  the  1st.  2nd  and  3rd  in  the  dark  half  are  held  to  be 
auspicious.  The  lunar  days  to  be  avoided  are  4th,  8th,  9th,  1 1th,  12th, 

1 4th  and  Full  and  New  Moon  days.  Some  are  of  opinion  that  the  13th  is 
good. 

Exception:  Even  the  14th  lunar  day  may  be  treated  as  good  if  the  boy  is 
above  the  prescribed  age. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  propitious.  Wednesday 
must  be  rejected  if  Mercury  Is  combust.  Sunday  is  ordinary  while 
Tuesday  should  be  invariably  rejected. 

The  following  constellations  are  good:  Anuradha,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Swati, 
Sravana,  Dhanishta,  Satabhisha,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra, 
Revati,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Aswini,  Punarvasu  and  Pushyami. 

Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  Virgo,  Libra  and  Aquarius  are  good.  The 
other  signs  should  be  avoided.  According  to  Vasishta  and  Garga.  the 
3rd  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  month  of  Chaitra  and  Vaisakha  and  the 
7th  day  in  the  bright  half  of  the  lunar  months  Magha  and  Phalguna  are 
highly  favourable. 


The  Moon  must  not  occupy  the  6th,  81th,  or  12th  house.  Malefics  should 


not  be  posited  in  quadrants.  The  ceremony  should  take  place  before 
noon.  The  8th  house  from  the  Lagna  must  be  unoccupied. 

The  third  house  should  be  fortified  by  the  situation  of  either  malefics  or 
benefics,  white  the  6th  should  be  devoid  of  a benefic.  Mars  and  Saturn 
should  be  avoided  in  the  5th. 

Let  Mars  and  Saturn  be  avoided  in  the  2nd  from  the  election  chart;  as 
otherwise  they  will  make  the  boy's  intellect  dull.  Similarly  their  situation 
in  the  12th  should  also  be  avoided.  The  Moon  should  always  be  avoided 
in  Lagna.  But,  however,  if  Cancer  is  the  ascendant  and  the  Moon  and 
Jupiter  are  in  conjunction  and  malefics  are  in  3,  6 and  1 1 , the  evil 
attached  to  the  situation  of  the  Moon  in  Lagna  becomes  neutralised. 

The  following  malefic  yogas  should  also  be  avoided: 

Spoorjitham.  - The  Sun  in  kendra  causes  this  yoga  and  the  result  is  the 
destruction  of  the  family. 

Spuritham.  - Mars  occupying  a kendrs  generates  this  evil  yoga  and 
generally  proves  fatal  to  the  Guru  (preceptor)  as  well  as  the  boy. 

Rudhitham.  - Saturn  occupying  a kendra  produces  this  evil  combination 
resulting  in  incurable  diseases. 

Rundhram.  - Rahu  in  a kendra  gives  rise  to  this  malefic  yoga.  It  proves 
fatal  to  the  mother. 

Ugram.  - This  arises  by  Ketu's  disposition  in  a kendra.  It  adversely 
affects  health  and  education. 

Besides  the  above  malefic  yogas,  the  Moon  should  not  be  affected  by 
Mercury  as  it  leads  to  the  boy's  blindness.  The  Moon  should  not  be  in 
her  own  Navamsa,  nor  in  that  of  the  Sun  or  Mars. 

The  following  are  of  course  very  favourable  combinations  for 
Upanayanam: 

(1)  The  6th,  7th  or  8th  house  from  the  Moon  being  occupied  by  a 
benefic. 

(2)  The  Sun  or  Venus  in  the  1 2th,  Mercury  in  the  2nd  and  Jupiter  in  a 
trine  or  a quadrant. 


(3)  Venus  in  Lagna.  Mercury  in  the  10th,  the  Sun  tn  the  11th  and  the 
Moon  in  a benefic  navamsa. 

(4)  When  the  Lagna  is  Pisces  occupied  by  Jupiter  or  Venus  with  the 
Sun  In  the  1 1th  and  Mercury  in  the  10th  or  12th  house. 

(6)  Gemini  rising  with  Mars  in  Aries.  Venus  in  Taurus  and  the  Moon  in 
Cancer. 


CHAPTER  XI 
Marriage 

Marriage  is  a most  complicated  structure  made  up  as  it  is  of  a whole 
series  of  subjective  and  objective  facts  of  a very  heterogeneous  nature. 
Since  we  are  concerned  with  the  psycho -astrological  aspect  of  marriage 
we  shall  exclude  the  objective  factors  of  legal  and  social  nature 
although  these  factors  have  a pronounced  influence  on  the 
psychological  relationship  of  the  married  pair. 

Marriage  is  not  an  institution  for  simple  brute  sense  gratification.  The 
idea  that  it  is  a civil  contract  terminable  at  will  smacks  of  meanness  in 
conception  of  the  grand  liabilities  and  assets  between  the  parties  to  be 
engaged  in  sacred  wedlock.  One  of  the  great  American  judges  said  "the 
contract  of  marriage  is  something  more  than  a civil  agreement  between 
the  parties,  the  extent  of  which  only  affects  themselves.  It  is  the  basis  of 
the  family,  and  its  dissolution  as  well  as  its  formation  is  a matter  of 
public  policy  in  which  the  body  or  community  is  deeply  interested  and  it 
is  to  be  governed  by  other  considerations  than  those  which  obtain  with 
regard  to  any  other  civil  contract  that  the  ground  which  shall  invalidate 
the  contract  must  be  something  more  than  a mere  representation  as  to 
collateral  matters  that  no  ground  will  annul  a marriage  which  does  not 
go  to  the  very  essence  of  the  contract". 

Marriage,  both  in  the  social  and  economic  sense,  is  a sexual 
relationship  entered  into  with  the  intention  of  making  it  permanent.  In 
India,  marriage  was  and  is  regarded  as  a religious  sacrament  and 
marriage  comprehends  the  equality  of  the  partner  in  respect  of  Dharma 
(right  conduct),  Artha  (financial  position),  Kama  (sex  relation)  and 
Moksha  (final  salvation).  The  universality  of  marriage  constitutes  one  of 
the  most  striking  differences  between  the  Hindus  and  the  other  races* 
When  the  question  of  marriage  is  considered,  various  factors  demand 


our  attention,  important  ones  being  physical  fitness,  mental  qualities, 
heredity,  sexual  compatibility  and  social  and  economic  status. 

In  the  modern  world  so  much  is  made  of  the  sex  element  in  marriage 
that  the  other  equally  important  factors,  social  and  psychological,  are 
practically  ignored.  The  Hindu  Sastras,  having  in  view  the  climatic  and 
ethnological  conditions  of  India,  have  fixed  the  maximum  and  minimum 
age  limits  for  marriage.  Marriages  between  parties  belonging  to  the 
same  Gotra  are  not  favoured  perhaps  because  of  the  dysgenic 
influence  on  the  offspring.  Inter-racial,  intercommunal  and  inter-religious 
marriages  are  not  looked  upon  favourably  because  in  such  matches 
there  are  cultural  differences. 

After  a careful  consideration  of  all  these  factors,  the  Hindus  had  devised 
an  astrological  means  of  judging  marriage  compatibility  whereby  the 
relations  between  the  couple  may  stand  the  strain  of  maladjustments. 
Pseudosexologists  and  sociologists  are  not  wanting  in  India  who  are 
ever  ready  to  point  out  their  finger  of  contempt  at  the  sound  and 
sensible  institution  of  marriage  developed  by  the  Hindus  after  centuries 
of  experience  and  experiments.  We  are  not  concerned  with  such 
socialistic  theories  advocating  companionate  marriage  and  encouraging 
unbridled  licence  in  love  affairs.  They  may  be  all  right  in  countries  like 
Russia  and  America  - the  melting  pots  of  different  races.  But  they 
cannot  hold  water  in  a country  like  India  whose  civilisation,  culture  and 
social  laws  are  peculiar  to  her  geographical  and  historical  positions. 

The  Hindus  have  solved  this  complex  problem  of  marriage  selection  by 
recourse  to  astrological  considerations,  If  investigations  into  the  various 
kutas  are  undertaken  before  the  marriage  is  contracted,  there  will 
perhaps  be  fewer  tragedies  than  at  present  and  less  marital  infidelity. 
Modern  science  has  devised  no  means  to  find  out  the  compatibility 
between  the  marrying  couple.  Sexologists  suggest  that  the  bride  and 
bridegroom  should  subject  themselves  to  a thorough  medical 
examination.  Although  this  sounds  reasonable,  it  makes  an  important 
omission  in  that  mere  physical  fitness  does  not  ensure  complete  marital 
happiness.  Happiness  largely  rests  upon  so  many  other  factors  that  the 
aid  of  astrology  should  be  sought  for  by  every  sensible  individual. 

In  selecting  horoscopes  for  marriage  purposes,  three  factors  have  to  be 
carefully  considered.  They  are:  - 


(a)  The  longevity  of  the  bride  and  the  bridegroom. 


(b)  The  larger  strength  of  the  7th  and  8th  houses. 

(c)  Agreeability  in  regard  to  the  Kutas  or  pooruththam. 

When  there  is  no  longevity  in  the  case  of  bride,  the  horoscope  must  be 
rejected  even  though  the  7th  house  may  be  strong  or  the  requsite 
number  of  units  are  available.  Likewise  when  the  7th  house  is  weak  and 
is  considerably  blemished,  the  horoscope  to  be  matched  should  have 
antidotes  or  counteracting  influences. 

The  kutas  or  the  units  of  agreement  should  be  considered  only  when 
there  is  general  sympathy  between  the  horoscopes  of  the  parties  to  be 
brought  together.  The  existing  practice  almost  all  over  India  and 
particularly  in  the  South  is  highly  defective  and  dangerous  as 
horoscopes  are  rejected  simply  because  they  do  not  conform  to  certain 
kutas,  while  the  most  important  factors  such  as  longevity,  widowhood, 
etc.,  are  completely  ignored. 

Therefore  it  is  very  essential  to  examine  to  start  with,  the  general 
strength  of  the  chart;  and  when  good  longevity  is  indicated  in  both 
horoscopes  and  they  are  free  from  the  afflictions  in  regard  to  the  7th 
and  8th  houses,  further  agreement  should  be  judged.  When  Mars  and; 
Venus  are  in  the  7th,  the  boy  or  girl  concerned  will  have  strong  sex- 
instincts  and  such  an  individual  should  be  mated  to  one  who  has  similar 
instincts  and  not  a person  having  Mercury  or  Jupiter  in  the  7th,  as  this 
makes  one  under-sexed.  When  sexual  incompatibility  sets  in  marriage, 
life  proves  charmless  and  friction  arises  between  the  couple.  Therefore 
it  is  the  duty  of  the  parents  to  consult  learned  astrologers  and  not  to 
entrust  the  work  of  comparing  horoscopes  to  all  persons  who  have  no 
practical  experience.  History  is  replete  with  ill-matched  marriages  and 
the  most  miserable  lives  the  couples  had  to  live. 

Socrates  philosopher  as  he  was  reputed  to  be,  was  united  in  marriage 
to  Xantippe  who,  if  rightly  reported,  perpetually  ridiculed  his 
philosophical  teachings  and  mercilessy  nagged  him  in  his  home.  Once 
when  he  had  invited  a distinguished  friend  to  dinner,  she  spitefully 
emptied  the  contents  of  a vessel  upon  his  head.  Plato  sympathisingly 
asked  him  why  he  bore  such  indignities  Meekly  replied  the  old 
philosopher:  "She  teaches  me  patience  and  charity,  and  shows  to  me 
that  if  I can  bear  with  her.  I can  bear  all  else  in  the  world".  Alcibiades, 
noted  for  brilliancy  of  intellect  and  a most  graceful  carriage  of 
personality,  was  strangely  unfortunate  in  his  marital  relations.  Too  proud 


to  directly  desert  his  wife  he  at  one  time  contemplated  and  even 
attempted  suicide  as  a release  from  his  bonds. 

Pericles,  ruling  Athens  for  50  years,  finding  it  brick  and  leaving  it  marble, 
was  not  only  orator  and  statesman,  but  in  other  ways  the  most  discrete 
and  majestic  character  of  that  remote  period.  His  relations  with  Aspasia 
caused  bitterest  criticism.  His  wife,  being  a fault  finding  social  drag, 
failing  to  stand  by  him  supporting  him  in  his  great  work  for  the  upholding 
of  Athens,  he  deliberately  parted  with  her.  bestowing  upon  her  half  of 
his  estates. 

Plato,  warned  by  Socrates,  his  teacher,  though  noble,  wealthy, 
scholastic  and  exceedingly  popular  in  the  higher  walks  of  Grecian 
society  never  married,  though  a great  admirer  and  lover  of  women. 

Cicero,  the  Roman  orator  and  early  pleader  in  the  forum,  studied  at  the 
feet  of  Zeno  and  Demetrius  and  married  the  heiress  Terentia. 

It  is  needless  to  produce  the  full  story  of  his  unsatisfactory  married  life. 
Milton,  holding  in  English  literature  one  of  the  highest  places  as  poet 
and  patriot,  wrote  three  pamphlets  upon  divorce  and  lived  not  merely 
unhappily  but  at  times  miserably  with  his  wife,  Mary  Powell. 

Thomas  Carlyle's  married  life  was  rough,  as  a tempestuous  sea  and 
accordingly  far  from  being  happy.  Dickens,  as  writer,  author  and  world 
painter  of  human  emotions,  stood  for  a time  in  Great  Britain  unrivalled 
and  yet  his  matrimonial  home  life  was  a most  painful  failure. 

We  can  multiply  the  instances  any  number.  In  the  modern  times, 
America  counts  such  social  shipwrecks  by  thousands  upon  thousands 
both  in  the  lower  and  the  higher  planes  of  marital  life.  In  India  also  the 
number  is  on  the  increase.  All  these  tell  their  own  sad  stories  of 
connubial  dissatisfaction  arid  family  wretchedness.  Readers  must  note 
that  in  the  example's  given  above,  the  married  lives  were  not  shattered 
by  the  death  of  wife,  or  husband  but  they  proved  tragic  because  of  the 
dislike  between  husband  and  wife. 

Having  read  the  above  paragraphs,  the  reader  may  be  tempted  to  put 
the  question  "Is  marriage  - true  harmonial  marriage  - possible  at  the 
present  state  of  the  world's  civilisation?"  The  quick  answer  is  in  the 
affirmative. 


A careful  consideration  of  the  important  astrological  works  reveals,  the 
following  information:  - 

(1)  If  Kuja  is  in  the  7th  house  unaspected  or  not  joined  by  benefics, 
there  will  be  frequent  quarrels  in  the  married  life  often  leading  to 
misunderstandings  and  separation. 

(2)  When  Saturn  is  in  the  8th  house,  and  particularly  in  a square  to 
Mars,  the  married  life  will  be  crossed  by  discord,  lack  of  mutual 
understanding  and  want  of  real  attachment. 

(3)  When  Leo  is  Lagna  and  the  7th  lord  Saturn  is  in  the  2nd,  the 
husband  will  be  subservient  to  the  wife  carrying  out  all  her  orders. 

(4)  Saturn  in  the  7th  house  is  also  indicative  of  unhappiness  in  marriage 
unless  Saturn  happens  to  be  either  lord  of  Lagna  or  lord  of  the  7th. 

(5)  According  to  *Prasna  Marga.  the  famous  Kerala  work  on  Astrology,  if 
the  Sun  and  Venus  occupy  the  5th,  7th,  or  9th  house  then  the  native  will 
lack  marital  happiness. 

* See  English  translation  of  Prasiia  Marga  by  Or.  B.  V.  Raman. 

(6)  A strong  malefic  in  the  4th,  particularly  Mars,  is  not  conducive  to 
conjugal  happiness. 

(7)  If  in  the  Ashtakavarga  of  Venus,  the  7th  house  from  Venus  contains 
a large  number  of  bindus  (positive  units)  and  the  wife  is  born  in  any  of 
the  asterisms  of  the  Sun,  then  his  wife  will  be  as  dear  to  him  as  life. 

(8)  When  the  longitude  of  the  7th  house  falls  in  a malefic  Navamsa, 
frequent  quarrels  and  misunderstandings  will  ensue. 

(9)  If  the  lords  of  the  7th  and  1 st  are  friends  then  the  native  will  be  loved 
by  his  wife.  Otherwise  there  will  be  no  harmony. 

The  above  combinations  do  not  speak  of  either  the  death  of  wife  or 
more  than  one  marriage.  They  simply  state  that  the  dispositions  of 
planets  in  a certain  manner  in  the  (male's  or  female's)  horoscope, 
render  the  marital  life  unhappy. 


(10)  Make  the  necessary  reductions  in  the  Ashtakavarga*  of  Venus. 


Mark  those  signs  that  contain  bindus  or  dots.  Then  take  that  sign  which 
contains  more  dots  and  get  the  bride  from  the  direction  indicated  by  that 
sign.  The  marriage  is  said  to  bring  real  happiness. 

* Ashtakavarga  System  of  Prediction  by  Dr.  B.  V.  Raman. 

We  should  like  to  make  a few  observations  based  on  our  studies  and 
experience. 

Today  in  the  Western  countries,  one  in  every  three  marriages  is  said  to 
end  in  divorce.  Love,  affection  and  loyalty  appear  to  be  inconsistent  or 
out  of  date  with  a gadget-geared,  money-mad  and  permissive  society. 
During  our  last  visit  to  U.S.,  Mrs.  X who  drove  us  from  Washington  to 
New  York  narrated  her  tale,  which  is  briefly  as  follows:  - A lawyer  by 
profession,  Mrs.  X,  28,  had  married  another  lawyer,  after  "knowing  him 
well"  and  had  a son  from  him.  Two  years  of  their  married  life  crossed  by 
frequent  quarrels,  "temperamental  clashes",  etc.,  resulted  in  divorce 
proceedings.  The  possession  of  the  child  was  given  by  the  court  to  the 
father.  The  mother  Mrs.  X revolted  and  she  became  miserable.  She  was 
seeking  astrological  advice  whether  she  could  marry  another  attorney 
who  was  in  similar  predicament  having  divorced  his  first  wife. 

This  case  is  typical  of  many  American  marriages.  Mrs  X had  met  an 
Indian  lady  and  had  been  astonished  to  learn  that  in  India  most 
marriages  "were  arranged"  by  the  parents  and  that  the  very  idea  of 
divorce  was  stilt  repugnant  to  the  average  Indian  lady.  And  she  was 
also  told  that  astrology  played  a vital  role  in  the  selection  of  parents;  all 
of  which  astonished  her  so  much  that  she  began  to  study  astrology  and 
"felt  convinced"  that  Indian  Society  had  certain  in-built  safety  valves 
which  made  marriages  stable;  and  that  despite  the  free  mixing  of  sexes 
and  the  permissive  nature  of  man-woman  relations  in  the  West, 
astrology  could  be  of  immense  value  in  the  selection  of  brides  and 
bridegrooms,  so  that  the  incidence  of  divorce  could  be  reduced  to  some 
extent. 

Thanks  to  the  intellectual  slavery  of  the  Indians  some  of  the 
"progressives"  are  now  clamouring  for  the  introduction  of  sex-education 
in  schools  and  colleges  in  India"  Mindly  aping  the  Westerners  and 
unmindful  of  the  jeopardising  of  the  moral  basis  and  sancitity  of  man 
and  woman  relations. 


Paradoxically  it  is  now  being  felt  in  many  Western  countries  that  the  so 


cailed  sex  education  instead  of  being  "enlightening"  by  way  of  imparting 
"scientific  truths"  and  "natural  biological  functions"  is  completely  deviod 
of  moral  guidance  and  has  resulted  in  an  improper  sensationalistic 
approach  on  the  part  of  young  students,  because  sex  is  viewed  from  the 
Freudian  point  of  view  as  mere  biological  function  and  not  from  the 
Jungian  point  of  view,  as  a vital  force  capable  of  being  directed  through 
creative  channels. 

Today  the  tragedy  of  India  appears  to  be  that  Indian  people  are  to  be 
considered  as  guinea  pigs  for  experimenting  with  theories,  once 
fashionable  in  the  west,  and  now  being  increasingly  rejected  as 
adversely  influencing  the  stability  of  marriage  and  family  fife. 

Recently  an  enterprising  Indian  scholar  had  a German  professor  of 
Sociology  as  his  guest:  The  German  professor  remarked  that  he  found 
the  institution  of  marriage  much  more  of  a success  in  India  and  that  he 
could  feel  the  presence  of  deeper  harmony  in  domestic  relations  In  India 
than  in  any  other  civilised  region  if  had  so  far  visited" 

The  Indian  professor's  reply  was  that  this  stabilrty  and  harmony  were 
probably  due  to  the  system  of  martrimonial  matching  of  horoscopes, 
invariably  resorted  to  by  parents  prior  to  the  settling  of  marriages.  The 
Indian  scholar  started  collecting  case  histories  of  married  couples  and 
he  managed  to  get  603  cases  for  study.  The  age  group  selected  was  30 
to  40.  All  the  people  concerned  were  born  between  1931  -40  and 
married  between  1955-60.  The  economic  background  was  mostly  rural 
and  agricultural  though  22%  of  the  case  histories  concerned  people  who 
derived  their  livelihood  from  commercial  and  industrial  occupations.  In 
most  cases  the  informants  were  males.  It  was  found  that  divorces  and 
separations  were  6%  and  deaths  of  husbands  or  wives  1 0%.  The 
scholar's  findings  were  that  47%  was  positive,  42%  neutral  and  11% 
negative.  By  positive  he  means  very  successful  marriages.  By  neutral 
he  means  a fair  degree  of  harmony  in  domestic  lives.  And  by  negative 
he  means  disharmonious  family  lives.  His  conclusion  is  that  these 
figures  prove  the  efficacy  of  astrology  in  marital  settlements. 

The  interrelations  between  the  planetary  and  stellar  positions  and  the 
sentiments  of  men  and  women  are  very  intimate.  Apart  from  the  other 
astrological  considerations,  mutual  dispositions  of  Mars  and  Venus  are 
to  be  carefully  considered.  It  cannot  be  a coincidence  that  divorce, 
separation  and  crimes  of  passion  increase  whenever  there  is  a 
conjunction  of  Venus  and  Mars  in  the  heavens,  especially  when  the 


constellations  involved  are  those  of  malefic  planets.  The  Venus-Mars 
configuartion  could  of  course  be  one  of  the  contributing  factors.  Children 
born  when  there  is  a Venus-Mars  conjunction  should  be  brought  up  in  a 
disciplined  manner  and  should  be  made  to  avoid  dissipating  habits  of 
immediate  pleasure.  The  adverse  effects  of  the  conjunction  could  be 
made  to  express  through  constructive  channels  if  Jupiter  aspects  the 
combination  or  is  or  is  in  a quadrant  therefrom, 

Venusis  indeed  associated  with  many  fascinating  aspects  of  life.  He 
rules  the  wife,  conveyance,  sex  harmony  and  union,  art,  attachment, 
family  happiness,  marriage  in  general,  vitality,  fertility,  physical  beauty 
and  frtendliness. 

Mars  abounds  in  energy,  aggressiveness,  fortitude,  driving  force  and  in 
association  with  Venus,  a tendency  to  excess  of  sensual  gratification. 

It  is  therefore  necessary  that  in  the  horoscopes  of  the  couple.  Mars- 
Venus  conjunction  or  opposition  should  have  a benefic  steadying  effect 
of  a favourable  disposition  of  Jupiter;  or  in  the  alternative  the 
conjunction  or  opposition  takes  place  in  the  constellations  of  Jupiter, 
Mercury  or  even  Venus;  Jupiter  and  Mercury  being  more  preferable. 

Venus-Mars  disposition  is  an  important  factor  for  physical  attraction.  But 
in  the  absence  of  Jupiter's  or  even  Saturn's  benign  influence,  real 
compatibility  may  be  lacking.  Venus-Mars  conjunction  makes  one  fond 
of  pleasure,  demonstrative  and  adds  zest  to  one's  sensual  life.  When 
Venus  and  Mars  are  involved  in  adverse  aspects,  difficulty  through 
excesses  and  trouble  through  marriage  follow  as  a matter  of 
consequence.  Venus  in  a good  sign  or  constellation  can  temper  the 
roughness  of  Mars,  but  if  Rahu  is  also  involved,  it  makes  one  lascivious, 
lowed  and  wicked.  Whether  in  the  horoscope  of  a boy  or  a girl,  Ketu- 
Venus-Mars  association  (or  even  mutual  aspect)  is  not  desirable  unless 
the  constellation  involved  belongs  to  Jupiter  or  Mercury  or  even  benefic 
Moon,  though  the  last  circumstance  might  render  the  native's  thinking 
highly  sensual.  Ketu-Venus-Mars  (or  Saturn)  denotes  danger  of  scandal 
in  marriage.  But  if  the  1 0th  or  house  of  Karma  is  well  disposed,  the 
affliction  becomes  somewhat  tempered. 

Let  us  take  the  example  of  a person  having  Venus-Mars  conjunction  in 
Taurus,  the  Lagna  being  Scorpio.  Venus,  Kalatrakaraka  in  the  7th,  is  not 
generally  favoured  by  ancient  writers  on  the  theory  of 
karakobhavanasaya  as  the  indications  of  the  7th  house  are  said  to  be 


inhibited.  Experience  has  however  revealed  that  this  textual  dictum  is 
not  quite  valid.  In  fact  Venus  in  the  7th  is  one  of  the  finest  combinations 
for  a fairly  happy  marriage,  denoting  affection  and  attachment  between 
the  couple.  When  in  the  case  under  reference,  Venus  is  in  Krittika  ruled 
by  the  Sun  and  Mars  in  Mrigasira,  the  7th  house  gains  considerable 
strength  and  the  married  life  will  be  happy  though  crossed  by  frequent 
emotional  clashes.  If  such  a native  is  married  to  one  who  has  Taurus 
rising  with  Venus  and  Mars  in  Scorpio,  each  will  constantly  try  to 
appease  the  dictates  of  others'  emotions  and  overindulge  in  sensual 
pleasures  to  the  detriment  of  their  health.  Venus  in  Taurus  is  good,  but 
in  a fiery  constellation  (Krittika)  it  gives  rise  to  stubborness.  In  Rohini,  on 
the  other  hand,  the  finer  qualities  of  Venus  find  expression.  It  is  always 
better  to  look  for  trinal  or  quadrangular  dispositions  of  Mars  and  Venus 
from  the  Lagna  or  the  Moon,  no  matter  even  if  they  conjoin  provided, 
they  are  in  different  constellations.  A similar  disposition  in  the  partner's 
horoscope  is  desirable  though  not  essential. 

Just  for  illustration  we  give  below  a chart  which  is  typical  of  a broken 
marriage.  The  native  being  a Hindu  there  was  no  legal  divorce. 


Lord  of  the  7th  Mars  is  in  the  1 1th  in  combination  with  Rahu  both  in  the 
constellations  of  Venus  and  aspected  by  Saturn  posited  in  the 
constellation  of  Ardra  Venus.  Kalatrakaraka  in  his  turn,  is  much  afflicted 
by  association  with  Ketu,  situated  in  the  constellation  of  Rahu  and 
aspected  by  Mars.  Both  the  lord  of  the  7th  and  Venus  have  been  much 
afflicted.  The  native  married  the  daughter  of  a highly  placed  and 


respected  officer.  Before  marriage,  the  girl's  father  had  been  advised  to 
reject  the  boy  as  the  girl's  married  life  would  not  only  suffer  from  untold 
misery,  as  the  native  could  become  a debauchee  but  she  could  be  even 
rejected,  the  marriage  took  place.  And  to  the  amazement  of  the  wife, 
she  found  that  her  husband  was  leading  a profligate  life  and  never  loved 
her.  All  her  attempts  to  wean  him  away  from  his  evil  ways  failed,  and 
from  sheer  disgust,  the  lady  returned  to  her  parent's  house.  The  sensual 
life  led  by  the  native  resulted  in  his  contacting  dreadful  venereal 
complaints. 

One  cannot  decide  the  make-up  of  a person  - boy  or  girl  - merely  on  the 
basis  of.the  Moon's  situation,  though  one  can  glean  a few  psychological 
facts.  It  is  the  total  assessment  of  each  horoscope  that  is  to  be 
considered  before  applying  the  tests  for  mutual  compatibility. 

In  a number  of  charts  of  husbands  and  wives  we  have  studied,  the 
following  peculiarities  have  been  noticed. 

When  Venus,  Mars  and  Jupiter  in  one  horoscope  are  situated  in  the 
other  horoscope  in  a trine  or  in  an  angle  of  3 and  1 1 positions,  that  is,  if 
in  the  husband's  horoscope,  Venus  is  in  Taurus  and  in  the  wife's 
horoscope,  in  Cancer  or  Virgo  or  Scorpio,  it  is  a favourable  position. 
When  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  have  similar  harmonious  positions,  except 
2 and  12  (dwirdwadasa),  there  is  usually  a strong  attachment.  Here 
again  if  the  husband's  Sun  is  in  Cancer  and  the  wife's  in  Virgo,  the 
needed  harmnnv  exists.  When  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  disposed  as 
suggested  above  but  Mars  in  one  case  is  in  a sign  which  happens  to  be 
the  12th  from  Venus  in  the  other  horoscope,  attachment  exists,  but 
there  cannot  be  normal  happiness  in  their  private  lives.  If  Venus  in  one 
horoscope  is  in  a sign  occupied  by  Saturn  in  the  other  a serious  and 
industrious  partner  is  indicated.  Mars  in  the  7th,  unaspected  by 
benefics,  indicates-frequent  quarrels  leading  to  misunderstandings. 
Saturn  in  the  8th,  aspected  by  Mars  (especially  4th  or  8th  house 
aspect),  is  not  conducive  to  mutual  understanding.  Saturn  in  the  7th 
confers  stability  in  the  marriage  but  the,  husband  or  wife  manifests 
coldness  and  not  warmth.  A strong  malefic  in  the  4th  affects  married 
happiness  unless  neutralised  by  a benefic  aspect.  If  the  Janma  Rasi  of 
the  wife  (or  husband)  happens  to  be  the  Lagna  of  the  husband  (or  wife), 
or  if  the  Lagna  of  the  wife  (or  husband)  (happens  to  be  the  7th  (in  the 
Horoscope)  from  the  position  of  the  lord  or  the  7th  (in  the  other)  the 
married  life  will  be  stable  and  built  on  mutual  understanding  and 
affection. 


When  certain  afflictions  are  present  in  one  horoscope  it  is  said  that  they 
could  be  mitigated  by  having  the  native  married  to  a partner  whose 
horoscope  has  similar  afflictions. 

After  satisfying  on  the  basis  of  the  birth  horoscopes  about  the  bride's  (or 
bridegroom's)  character,  health,  general  mental  soundness,  the 
agreement  between  the  two  horoscopes  is  to  be  judged. 

When  evil  combinations  indicating  misery  in  married  life  are  present  in 
the  horoscope  of  a bride,  then  the  same  can  be  mitigated  by  marrying 
her  to  a boy  whose  horoscope  has  similar  evil  combinations.  The  evils 
can  also  be  avoided  by  testing  the  marriage  adaptability  and  by 
performing  the  marriages  in  proper  Muhurthas. 

Therefore  with  a view  to  avoid  such  unpleasant  consequences,  the 
astrological  works  of  the  Maharshis  have  laid  down  certain  units  of 
strength  and  agreement  and  when  these  are  agreeable,  the  married 
couple  would  live  happily  in  spite  of  external  and  physical  discomforts 
like  poverty,  etc. 

The  Maharshis  have  claimed  that  by  electing  a proper  time  or  Muhurtha 
for  marriage,  several  of  the  evil  indications  in  the  charts  of  the  couple 
can  be  minimised  to  a great  extent. 

In  this  chapter,  I have  confined  myself  to  the  elucidation  of  rules 
governing  marriage  adaptability.  It  is  presumed  that  before  applying 
these  rules,  the  horoscopes  have  been  judged  already  in  regard  to  the 
7th  and  8th  houses. 

There  are  12  factors,  to  be  considered  in  order  to  judge  the  suitability  for 
a proposed  matrimonial  alliance  out  of  which  eight  are  supremely 
important.  They  are:  (1)  Dina,  (2)  Gana,  (3)  Mahendra,  (4)  Stree- 
Deergha,  (5)  Yoni,  (6)  Rasi,  (7)  Rasyadhipathi,  (8)  Vasya,  (9)  Rajju,  (10) 
Vedha,  (11)  Varna,  and  (12)  Nadi. 

In  order  to  illustrate  these  principles,  we  shall  consider  the  horoscopes 
of  a male  and  a female  born  in  Mrigasira  and  Satabhisha  respectively.  It 
is  assumed  that  the  7th  and  8th  houses  are  not  only  strong  but  are 
mutually  well  disposed. 

1 . Dina  Kuta.  - Count  the  constellation  of  the  boy  from  that  of  the  girl 
and  divide  the  number  by  9.  If  the  remainder  is  2,  4,  6,  8 or  0 it  is  good. 


The  number  of  units  of  compatibility  assigned  to  this  Kuta  is  3 in  case 
agreement  is  found. 

Example:  - The  constellation  of  the  boy  (viz.,  Mrigasira  in  Taurus) 
counted  from  that  of  the  girl  (Dhanishta  in  Makara)  gives  10.  This 
divided  by  9 leaves  a remainder  of  1 and  hence  there  is  no  agreement, 
and  no  units  of  strength  are  scored  on  this  account. 

2.  Gana  Kuta.  - This  seems  to  have  an  important  bearing  on  the 
temperament  and  character  of  the  couple  concerned.  Compatibility  of 
temperament  and  not  of  course  identity  of  temperament  is  called  for  in 
astrology.  A difference  of  temperament  may  be  harmonious  and 
complimentary.  But  a compatibility  of  temperament  is  essential  to  a 
satisfactory  marriage  union.  Astrologically  three  Ganas  (temperaments 
of  natures)  are  recognised  viz.,  Deva  (divine),  Manusha  (human),  and 
Rakshasa  (diabolical).  Deva  represents  piety,  goodness  of  character 
end  charitable  nature.  Manusha  is  a mixture  of  good  and  bad,  while 
Rakshasa  suggests  dominance,  self-will  and  violence.  These  different 
natures  are  indicated  by  the  birth,  constellation.  A distaste  for  piety  and 
religious  disposition  cannot  be  easily  associated  with  piety  and  religious 
nature.  A difference  in  beliefs  and  dogmas  cannot  always  be 
overbalanced  by  sexual  compatibility.  Hence  one  born  in  a Deva 
constellation  is  not  able  to  get  on  well  with  a person  born  in  Rakshasa 
constellation.  A Deva  can  marry  a Deva,  a Manusha  can  marry  a 
Manusha  and  a Rakshasa  can  marry  a Rakshasa. 

Manusha  or  a Deva  man  should  not  marry  a Rakshasa  girl  unless  there 
are  other  neutralising  factors.  But  marriage  between  a Rakshasa  man 
and  a Deva  or  Manusha  girl  is  passable.  If  marriage  is  brought  about 
between  prohibited  Ganas  there  will  be  quarrels  and  disharmony.  So 
that  the  couple  would  always  welcome  an  opportunity  for  separation  and 
divorce.  The  following  constellations  denote  the  different  Ganas:  - 

Deva  Gana.  - Punarvasu,  Pushyami,  Swati,  Hasta,  Sravana,  Revati, 
Anuradha,  Mrigasira  and  Aswini. 

Manusha  Gana.  - Rohini,  Pubba,  Poorvashadha,  Poorvabhadra, 

Bharani,  Aridra,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra. 

Rakshasa  Gana.  - Krittika,  Aslesha,  Makha,  Chitta,  Visakha,  Jyeshta, 
Moola,  Dhanishta  and  Satabhisha. 


The  number  of  benefic  units  for  agreement  is  6. 

Example:  - Mrigasira  comes  under  Deva  Gana  while  Dhanishta  comes 
under  Rakshasa.  Hence,  Gana  Kuta  is  absent. 

If  the  asterism  of  the  bride  is  beyond  the  14th  from  that  of  the 
bridegroom  the  evil  may  be  ignored. 

3.  Mahendra.  - The  constellation  of  the  boy  counted  from  that  of  the  girl 
should  be  the  4th,  7th,  10th,  13th,  16th,  19th,  22nd  or  25th.  This 
promotes  well-being  and  increases  longevity. 

Example:  - Mrigasira  (constellation  of  the  boy)  is  the  1 0th  from 
DhanisnTa  (girl's  constellation).  Hence  good. 

4.  Stree-Deergha.  - The  boy's  constellation  should  preferably  be  beyond 
the  9th  from  that  of  the  girl.  According  to  some  authorities  the  distance 
should  be  more  than  7 constellations. 

Exception:  - This  consideration  may  be  ignored  if  Rasi  Kuta  and  Graha 
Maitri  obtain. 

Example:  - Mrigasira  is  beyond  9 constellations  from  Dhanishta.  Hence 
agreement  in  regard  to  Stree-Deergha  is  present. 

5.  Yoni  Kuta.  - Yoni  means  sex  and  by  Yoni  Kuta  is  implied  sexual 
compatibility.  The  sexual  urge  of  a person  born  for  instance  in  Chitta  is 
supposed  to  be  as  strong  as  that  of  a tiger.  The  human  embryo  in 
course  of  its  development  passes  through  the  various  stages  of 
evolution  - mammals,  quadrupeds,  etc.,  so  that  the  tendencies  of  certain 
animals  will  be  predominant  The  birth  constellation  seems  to  show  this 
predominance.  Each  sign  and  degree  of  the  zodiac  expresses  the 
degree  of  evolution  of  the  individual  concerned.  Thus,  one  born  in  Leo 
will  have  in  him  the  characteristics  of  a lion  while  the  other  born  in  Aries 
will  be  timid  and  mild.  It  is  these  biological  influences  that  seem  to  be  at 
the  root  of  all  astrological  considerations.  If  both  the  couple  belong  to 
the  male  constellations,  there  will  be  frequent  quarrels  and  want  of 
agreement  in  sex-matters.  So  the  best  way  is  to  mate  a male  belonging 
to  a male  constellation  with  a female  belonging  to  a female 
constellation.  The  Kutas  in  general  lay  down  the  foundation  for  marriage 
happiness. 


Therefore  the  Yoni  Kuta  takes  into  account  the  sexual  aspect  of 
marriage  and  indicates  the  sex  affinities  such  as  the  degree  of  sex-urge, 
sex-compatibility,  the  size  of  copulatory  organs  and  so  on.  Havelock 
Ellis  says  that  "out  of  500  consecutive  cases  coming  for  advice  (1930) 
all  but  one  showed  sexual  maladjustment  as.  a complicating  factor". 

This  reveals  to  us  the  importance  of  Yoni  Kuta.  All  the  27  constellations 
have  been  assigned  certain  animals  and  sexes  as  given  below:  - 


Male  Female  Class  ofYoni 


1 Aswini  Satabhisha  Horse 

2 Bharani  Revati  Elephant 

3 Pushya  Krittika  Sheep 

4 Rohini  Mrigasira  Serpent 

5 Moola  Aridra  Dog 

6 Aslesha  Punarvasu  Cat 

7 Makha  Pubba  Rat 

8 Uttara  Uttarabhadra  Cow 

9 Swati  Hasta  Buffalo 

10  Visakha  China  Tiger 

11 J yeshta  Anuradha  Hare 

12  Poorvashadha  Sravana  Monkey 

13  Poorvabhadra  Danishta  Lion 


14  Uttarashadha  Mongoose 


Marriage  between  the  constellations  indicating  same  class  of  yoni  and 
between  the  male  and  female  stars  of  that  yoni  said  to  conduce  to  great 
happiness,  perfect  harmony  and  progeny.  If  the  male  and  female 


happen  to  be  born  in  friendly  yonis,  but  both  representing  female 
constellations  there  will  be  fair  happines  and  agreement.  If  the  couple 
belong  both  to  male  constellations  there  will  be  constant  quarrels  and 
unhappiness.  If  marriage  takes  place  between  constellations  indicating 
unfriendly  yonis  it  is  better  marriage  is  avoided.  For  example,  if  marriage 
takes  place  between  a male  born  in  Moola  and  female  born  in  Aridra  it 
wiil  turn  out  a very  happy.  The  constellations  Moola  and  Aridra 
represent  the  male  and  female  organs  of  a dog.  The  union  of  these  is 
agreeable  and  conduces  to  favourable  results  to  the  fullest  extent.  If 
marriage  takes  place  between  a man  born  in  the  constellation 
Satabhisha  and  a girl  born  in  Punarvasu,  both  representing  the  female 
stars,  the  marriage  is  passable  but  not  so  good  as  in  the  first  instance. 
Marriages  between  parsons  belonging  to  constellations  indicating 
inimical  yonis  are  not  recommended.  The  number  of  units  for  Yoni  Kuta 
is  4. 

Example:  - Both  Mrigasira  and  Dhanishta  arc  female  constellations,  the 
one  typifying  the  yoni  of  a serpent  and  the  other  that  of  a lion.  Hence, 
Yoni  Kuta  is  not  present. 

The  following  pairs  are  hostile  and  in  matching  Yoni  Kuta,  they  should 
be  avoided:  - 

Cow  and  tiger;  elephant  and  lion;  horse  and  buffalo;  dog  and  hare; 
serpent  and  mongoose;  monkey  and  goat;  and  cat  and  rat.  In  a similar 
way,  similar  pairs  of  constellations  typifying  other  hostile  pairs  as  they 
occur  in  nature  should  be  avoided  (see  Table  on  page  72). 

In  the  following  table,  units  for  matching  different  Yonis  are  given. 
Suppose  the  boy's  star  is  Krrttika  signifying  the  Yoni  of  sheep  and  the 
girl's  star  is  Chitta  signifying  tiger.  In  the  column  "sheep"  running  down 
our  eye  in  the  horizontal  column  against  tiger,  the  unit  of  agreements  is 

I. 


Ho  El  Sh  Se  Do  Ca  Ra  Co  BuTi  Ha  Mo  Mg  Li 


Horse.  42232221013321 
Elephant  2 4 332222312320 


Sheep  23421213312031 


Serpent  3 3 242111122202 


Dog  22124212210211 
Cat  22212402213321 

Rat  22111042222212 

Cow  1 2 3 1 2 2 2 4 3 0 3 2 2 1 

Buffalo  03312223412221 
Tiger  1 1121120141121 
Hare  12220323214221 
Monkey  3 3 022322212432 
Mongoose  22301212222342 
Lion  10121121211224 

6.  Rasi  Kuta.  - If  the  Rasi  of  the  boy  happens  to  be  the  2nd  from  that  of 
the  girl  and  if  the  Rasi  of  the  girl  happens  to  be  the  12th  from  that  of  the 
boy,  evil  results  will  follow.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Rasi  of  the  boy 
falls  in  the  12th  from  the  girl's  or  the  Rasi  of  the  girl  is  in  the  2nd  from 
that  of  the  boy  astrology  predicts  longevity  for  the  couple.  If  the  Rasi  of 
the  boy  is  the  3rd  from  that  of  the  girl,  there  will  be  misery  and  sorrow. 
But  if  the  Rasi  of  the  girl  is  the  3rd  from  that  of  the  boy,  there  will  be 
happiness.  If  the  boy's  falls  in  the  4th  from  that  of  the  girl's,  then  there 
will  be  great  poverty;  but  if  the.  Rasi  of  the  girl  happens  to  fall  in  the  4th 
from  the  boy's  there  will  be  great  wealth.  If  the  boy's  Rasi  falls  in  the  5th 
from  that  of  the  girl,  there  will  be  unhappiness.  But  if  the  girl's  Rasi  falls 
in  the  5th  from  that  of  the  boy,  there  will  be  enjoyment  and  prosperity. 
But  where  the  Rasis  of  the  boy  and  the  girl  are  in  the  7th  houses 
mutually,  then  there  will  be  health,  agreement  and  happiness.  If  the 
boy's  Rasi  falls  in  the  6th  from  the  girl's  there  will  be  loss  of  children,  but 
if  the  girl's  is  the  6th  from  the  boy's,  then  the  progeny  will  prosper. 

The  number  of  units  for  Rasi  Kuta  is  7. 


Exception:  - When  both  the  Rasis  are  owned  by  one  planet  or  if  the 
lords  of  the  two  Rasis  happen  to  be  friends,  the  evil  attributed  above  to 
the  inauspicious  disposition  of  Rasis  gets  cancelled. 

7.  Rasyadhipathi  or  Graha  Maitram.  - This  is  the  most  important  Kuta 
inasmuch  as  it  deals  with  the  psychological  dispositions  of  the  Couple. 
The  mental  qualities  of  the  parties  and  their  affection  for  each  other  are 
admittedly  of  vital  importance  to  their  happiness.  This  must  be  tested 
before  marriage.  In  Considering  Graha  Maitram  the  friendship  or 
otherwise  between  the  lords  of  the  Janma  Rasis  of  the  persons 
concerned  is  very  important.  Planetary  friendships  are  given  in  almost 
all  astrological  works.  But  still  I give  below  a table  indicating  the 
relations  between  the  different  planets  so  that  the  reader  may  not  have 
to  refer  to  other  books. 


Planetary  Friendships 
Friend  Neutral  Enemy 


The  Sun  Moon,  Mars,  J upiter  Mercury  Saturn,  Venus 
The  Moon  Sun,  Mercury  Mars,  J upiter 
Venus,  Saturn 


Mars  Sun,  Moon,  J upiter  Venus,  Saturn  Mercury 
Mercury  Sun,  Venus  Mars,  J upiter,  Moon 
Saturn 


J upiter  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  Saturn  Mercury,  Venus 
Venus  Mercury,  Saturn  Mars,  J upiter  Sun,  Moon 


Saturn  Mercury,  Venus  J upiter  Sun,  Moon,  Mars 

Some  suggest  that  in  considering  the  planetary  relations,  the  temporary 
dispositions  should  also  be  taken  into  account.  This  in  my  humble 
opinion  is  not  necessary,  because,  the  entire  subject  of  adaptability 
hinges  on  the  birth  constellations  and  not  on  birth  charts  as  a whole. 


When  the  lords  of  the  Janma  Rasis  of  the  bride  and  bridegroom  are 
friends,  the  Rasi  Kuta  is  said  to  obtain  in  full.  When  one  is  a friend  and 
the  other  is  a neutral,  it  is  passable.  When  both  are  neutral.  Rasi  Kuta  is 
very  ordinary.  When  both  are  enemies,  Rasi  Kuta  does  not  exist. 

Exception:  - Even  when  there  is  no  friendship  between  the  Janma  Rasi 
lords  of  the  bridegroom  and  bride,  Rasi  Kuta  may  be  said  to  exist  if 
friendship  prevails  between  the  planets  owning  the  Navamsas  occupied 
by  the  Moon. 

The  number  of  units  for  this  Kuta  is  5. 

Example:  - In  our  illustration,  the  Janma  Rasi  lords  are  Venus  and 
Saturn.  Both  are  friends.  Therefore  Rasi  Kuta  is  complete.  Supposing 
the  bride  and  bridegroom  are  born  in  Makha  2 (Leo)  and  Satabhisha  2 
(Saturn).  The  lords  will  be  the  Sun  and  Saturn  respectively  and  they  are 
not  friends.  In  such  a case  if  the  Navamsa  relationship  is  Considered, 
then  the  Moon  will  be  in  Taurus  (Venus)  and  Capricorn  (Saturn) 
respectively.  Venus  and  Saturn,  are  friends  and  therefore  the  match  is 
permissible.  One  will  have  to  be  very  careful  in  the  assessment  of  these 
factors  and  on  superficial  grounds  no  horoscope  should  be  rejected  as 
unsuitable  or  unfortunate. 

8.  Vasya  Kuta.  - This  is  important  as  suggesting  the  degree  of  magnetic 
control  or  amenability  the  wife  or  husband  would  be  able  to  exercise  on 
the  other.  For  Aries  - Leo  and  Scorpio  are  amenable.  For  Taurus  - 
Cancer  and  Libra;  for  Gemini  - Virgo;  for  Cancer  - Scorpo  and 
Sagittarius;  for  Leo  - Libra;  for  Virgo  - Pisces  and  Gemini;  for  Libra  - 
Capricorn  and  Virgo;  for  Scorpio  - Cancer;  for  Sagittarius  - Pisces;  for 
Capricorn  - Aries  and  Aquarius;  for  Aquarius  - Aries;  arid  for  Pisces  - 
Capricorn.  The  unit  of  agreement  is  2. 

Example:  - In  our  illustration,  neither  the  boy's  nor  the  girl's  horoscope  is 
subject  to  the  control  of  the  other. 

9.  Rajju.  - This  indicates  the  strength  or  duration  of  married  life  and 
therefore  it  merits  special  attention.  The  27  constellations  have  been 
grouped  into  five  types  of  Rajju. 

Padarajju.  - Aswini,  Aslesha,  Makha,  Jyeshta.  Moola.  Revati. 

Katirajju.  - Bharani,  Pushyami,  Pubba,  Anuradha,  Poorvashadha, 


Uttarabhadra. 


Nabhi  or  Udararajju.  - Krittika,  Punarvasu,  Uttara,  Visakha, 

Uttarashadha,  Poorvabhadra. 

Kantarajju.  - Rohini,  Aridra  Hasta.  Swati.  Sravana,  and  Satabhisha. 
Sirorajju.  - Dhanishta,  Chitta  and  Mrigasira. 

The  Janma  Nakshatras  of  the  couple  should  not  fall  in  the  same  rajju.  If 
they  fall  in  Sira  (head)  husband's  death  is  likely;  if  in  Kantha  (neck)  the 
wife  may  die;  if  in  Udara  (stomach)  the  children  may  die;  if  in  Katl 
(waist)  poverty  may  ensue;  and  if  in  Pada  (foot)  the  couple  may  be 
always  wandering.  Hence,  it  is  desirable  that  the  boy  and  the  girl  have 
constellations  belonging  to  different  rajjus  or  groups. 

10.  Vedha.  - This  means  affliction.  Certain  constellations  are  capable  of 
affecting  or  afflicting  certain  other  constellations  situated  at  particular 
distances  from  them;  For  instance,  Aswini  is  said  to  cause  Vedha  to 
18th  constellation  (viz.,  Jyeshta)  from  it;  Bharani  to  the  16th  (viz., 
Anuradha)  and  so  on.  The  following  pairs  of  constellations  affect  each 
other  and,  therefore,  no  marriage  should  be  brought  about  between  a 
boy  and  girl  whos  Janma  Nakshatras  belong  to  the  same  pair  unless  the 
are  other  relieving  factors. 

Aswini  and  Jyeshta;  Bharani  and  Anuradha;  Krittika  and  Visakha;  Rohini 
and  Swati;  Aridra  and  Sravana  Punarvasu  and  Uttarashadha;  Pusayami 
and  Poorvashadha;  Aslesha  and  Moola;  Makha  and  Revati;  Pubba  and 
Uttarabhadra;  Uttara  and  Poorvabhadra;  Hasta  and  Satabhisha, 
Mrigasira  and  Dhanishta.  In  our  example,  the  constellations  of  the 
couple  (Mrigasira  and  Dhanishta)  belong  to  the  prohibited  pair  and 
hence  Vedhakuta  is  absent. 

1 1 . Varna.  - This  seems  to  signify  the  degree  of  spiritual  or  ego 
development  of  the  marrying  partners.  Pisces,  Scorpio  and  Cancer 
represent  the  highest  development  - Brahmin;  Leo,  Sagittarius  and  Libra 
indicate  the  second  grade  - or  Kshatriya;  Aries,  Gemini  and  Aquarius 
suggest  the  third  or  the  Vaisya;  while  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capricorn 
indicate  the  last  grade,  viz.,  Sudra.  A girl  belonging  fo  a higher  grade  of 
spiritual  development  should  not  be  mated  to  a boy  of  lesser 
development.  The  vice  verse  or  both  belonging  to  the  same  grade  or 
degree  is  allowed. 


The  unit  of  agreement  is  1 . 


12.  Nadi  Kuta.  - This  is  considered  to  be  the  most  important  and  at  the 
same  time  the  most  significant  Kuta.  In  Sanskrit,  Nadi  means  several 
things  but  in  reference  to  astrology,  it  signifies  pulse  or  nervous  energy 
indicating  the  physiological  and  to  a certain  extent  hereditary  factors. 
The  Hindu  medical  works  enumerate  three  Nadis  or  humours,  viz., 
Vatha  (wind),  Pitha  (bile)  and  Sleshma  (phlegm).  A boy  with  a 
predominantly  windy  or  phlegmatic  or  bilious  constitution  should  not 
marry  a girl  of  the  same  type.  The  girl  should  belong  to  a different 
temperament.  The  three  Nadis  are  ruled  by  the  different  constellations 
as  follows:  - 


Vata  Pitha  Sleshma 


Aswini  Bharani  Krittika 
Aridra  Mrigasira  Rohini 
Punarvasu  Pushyami  Aslesha 
Uttara  Pubba  Makha 

Hasta  Chitta  Swati 
J yeshta  Anuradha  Visakha 
Moola  Poorvashadha  Uttarasnadha 


Satabhisha  Dhanishta  Sravana 


Poorvabhadra  Uttarabhadra  Revati 


If  the  constellation  of  the  boy  and  girl  fall  in  different  rows,  then 
agreement  between  the  couple  will  be  good.  They  should  not  fall  in  the 
middle.  Stars  of  the  couple  may  fall  in  the  first  and  the  last  line 
undercertain  circumstances. 

If  Nadi  Kuta  is  not  present  on  the  basis  of  the  Nakshatras,  then  the 
same  may  be  reckoned  taking  into  account  the  Nakshatra  Padas.  Thus, 
the  different  quarters  will  be  governed  by  the  three  humours  (Nadis) 


thus: 


Aswini  1 Aswini  2 Aswini  3 

Bharani  2 Bharani  1 Aswini  4 

Bharani  3 Bharani  4 Krittika  1 

Krittika  4 Krittika  3 Krittika  2 


Rohini  1 Rohini  2 Rohini  3 


Beginning  from  Aswini  1 , the  counting  should  be  done  forwards  and 
backwards  in  threes  as  given  above. 

The  unit  ascribed  for  this  Kuta  is  8. 

In  the  example  considered  above,  both  the  constellations  fall  in  the 
middle  line  and  hence  Nadi  Kuta  is  completely  absent. 

Appendix  1 gives  a table  for  measuring  the  agreement  units.  In  the  first 
column  (longitudinal)  the  constellations  of  the  bride  are  given. 

In  the  first  horizontal  column,  the  boy's  nakshatra  is  given.  Take  the 
figure  in  the  column  where  the  girl's  and  the  boy's  stars  interesect. 
Suppose  the  boy's  star  is  Mrigasira  1 , the  Rasi  being  Taurus. 

The  girl's  star  is  Satabhisha  2,  Rasi  being  Kumbha.  Running  down  our 
eye  from  Taurus,  Mrigasira  2 (horizontal  first  column)  to  the  horizontal 
line  of  Satabhisha  4,  Kumbha,  we  find  the  figure  26.5  as  the  total  units 
of  agreement. 


Special  Considerations 

We  have  dealt  with  above,  fairly  exhaustively,  the  question  of  marriage 
adaptability  and  the  importance  of  the  various  Kutas  or  physiological 
and  psychological  junctions  in  the  human  body  and  how  a consideration 
of  each  Kuta  would  enable  us  to  appreciate  the  harmony  or  discord 
likely  to  prevail  between  intending  marriage  partners. 


Exceptions 


We  shall  now  give  certain  contingencies  arising  by  virtue  of  common 
Janma  Rasi,  common  birth  star  and  the  absence  of  certain  Kutas. 

(1)  The  absence  of  Stree-Deerga  may  be  ignored  if  Rasi  Kuta  add 
Graha  Maitri  are  present. 

(2)  If  the  Rasi  of  the  girl  is  odd,  the  6th  and  8th  Rasis  therefrom  are 
friendly.  If  the  Rasi  of  the  girl  is  even  the  2nd  and  12th  therefrom 
become  friendly.  The  evil  due  to  the  birth  of  the  bride  in  a Rakshasa 
gana  star  may  be  ignored  if  Janma  Rasi  being  2nd  and  12th,  9th  and 
5th  or  6th  and  8th,  the  lords  of  the  Rasis  are  the  same  or  are  mutual 
friends. 

(3)  Though  Graha  Maitri  is  by  far  the  most  important,  it  need  not  be 
considered  if  the  couple  have  their  Janma  Rasis  disposed  in  one  and 
seven  from  each  other. 

(4)  Rajju  Kuta  need  not  be  considered  in  case  Graha  Maitri,  Rasi,  Dina 
and  Mahendra  Kutas  are  present. 

(5)  The  evil  due  to  Nadi  Kuta  can  be  ignored  subject  to  the  following 
conditions:  - 

(a)  The  Rasi  and  Rajju  Kuta  prevail,  (b)  The  same  planet  is  lord  of  the 
Janma  Rasis  of  both  the  mate  and  the  female,  (c)  The  lords  of  ine 
Janma  Rasis  of  the  couple  are  friends. 

In  many  cases,  the  Janma  Rasis  of  the  Janma  Nakshatras  of  the  bride 
and  bridegroom  would  be  the  same.  Special  attention  is  paid  by 
astrological  writers  to  such  exceptions  and  we  shall  throw  some  light  on 
them  for  the  edification  of  our  readers. 

Common  Janma  Rasi.  - Views  differ  as  regards  the  results  accruing 
from  the  Janma  Rasis  being  common.  According  to  Narada,  common 
Janma  Rasi  would  be  conducive  to  the  couple  provided  they  are  born  in 
different  constellations.  Garga  opines.that  under  the  above 
circumstance,  the  asterism  of  the  boy  should  precede  that  of  the  girl  if 
the  marriage  is  to  prove  happy.  Incase  the  reverse  holds  good  (Stree- 
purva).  i.  e.,  the  constellation  of  the  girl  precedes  that  of  the  boy,  the 
alliance  should  be  rejected.  This  view  is  supported  by  other  sages,  viz.. 
Brihaspathi  and  Bhrigu.  In  fact,  the  author  of  Muhurtha  Thathwa  goes  to 
the  extent  of  saying  that  in  cases  of  common  Janma  Rasi,  provided  the 


man's  constellation  is  preceding  the  girl's,  the  Kutas  or  adaptability  need 
not  be  applied  at  all. 

Common  Janma  Nakshatra.  - This  is  a further  extension  of  the  principle 
of  common  Janma  Rasi.  The  Janma  Nakshatras  of  the  bride  and 
bridegroom,  being  one  and  the  same,  are  approved  in  case  of  Rohini, 
Aridra,  Makha,  Hasta,  Visakha,  Sravana.  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati.  The 
effect  would  bef  ordinary  if  the  common  Janma  Nakshatras  are  Aswini, 
Krittika,  Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Pubba.  Uttara.  Chitta, 

Anuradha,  Poorvashadha  and  Uttarashadha,  Bharani,  Aslesha.  Swati, 
Jyeshta,  Moola,  Dhanishta,  Satabhisha  and  Poorvabhadra  happening  to 
be  common  Janma  Nakshatras  are  not  recommended. 

Here  again  certain  ancient  authors  hold  that  even  though  the  Janma 
Nakshatras  are  same,  the  evil  becomes  nullified  if  the  Padas  are 
different.  If  the  Janma  Nakshatra  belongs  to  two  signs  (e.g.,  Krittika)  the 
Pada  of  the  bride  should  relate  to  the  preceding  sign.  For  example,  if 
Krittika  is  the  common  Janma  Nakshatra,  the  bride  should  have  her 
Janma  Rasi  in  Mesha  and  the  bridegroom  in  Vrishabha.  If,  however,  the 
common  Janma  Nakshatra  belongs  to  two  signs  equally  (e.g.,  Mrigasira, 
Chitta,  etc.)  the  sign  for  the  first  two  quarters  should  be  that  of  the 
bridegroom. 

The  couple  should  not  have  the  same  Janma  Rasi,  same  Janma 
Nakshatra  and  Pada.  However,  in  regard  to  Satabhisha,  Hasta,  Swati. 
Aswini,  Krittika,  Poorvashadha,  Mrigasira  and  Makha,  the  evil  given  rise 
to  by  virtue  of  common  Janma  Rasi,  Nakshatra  and  Pada  gets 
cancelled  if  the  couple  are  born  in  the  first  quarter. 

Destructive  Constellations 

There  is  a belief  current  amongst  the  public  that  girls  born  in  certain 
constellations  cause  the  death  of  certain  relatives.  For  instance,  a girl 
born  in  Visakha  is  said  to  bring  about  the  destruction  of  her  husband's 
younger  brother  so  that  parents  generally  try  to  find  out  a bridegroom 
who  does  not  have  a younger  brother.  Even  when  there  are  other  merits 
in  the  horoscope,  it  is  rejected  on  the  simple  ground  that  the  girl  is  born 
in  Visakha.  This  is  entirely  due  to  ignorance  of  the  real  astrological 
factors  governing  such  considerations.  Only  certain  Padas  or  quarters 
should  be  held  inauspicious  and  not  the  entire  constellation.  Thus,  in 
regard  to  Visakha,  only  the  last  quarter  is  evil  and  not  the  first  three. 
Therefore  a girl  born  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  Visakha  should  not  be 


considered  to  bring  misfortune  to  her  husband's  younger  brother. 
Similarly,  the  boy  or  girl  born  in  the  first  quarter  of  Moola  is  to  be 
rejected  as  it  is  said  to  cause  the  death  of  the  father-in-law.  The  last 
three  quarters  of  Moola  are  beneficial.  A girl  born  in  Jyeshta  is  said  to 
cause  evil  to  her  husband's  elder  brother.  Almost  all  authors  agree  that 
(certain  parts  of)  Moola,  Astesha,  Jyeshta  and  Visakha  are  destructive 
constellations  - Moola  (first  quarter)  for  husband's  father;  Aslesha  (first 
quarter)  for  husband's  mother;  Jyeshta  (first  quarter)  for  girl's  husband's 
elder  brother;  and  Visakha  (last  quarter)  for  husband's  younger  brother.* 

*Mooladou  swasuram  hanti  vyaladouca  bhidhankanam 
Jyeshtadou  jyeshtajam  hanti  visakhantecha  devaram 


The  So-called  Kuja  Dosha 

The  position  of  Venus  and  Mars  is  very  important  in  judging  marital 
relations.  Mars  whose  element  is  fire  rules  marriage.  Where  he  is  badly 
situated  or  associated  in  the  horoscope  of  a male  or  female,  it  follows 
that  the  sacerdotal  fire  gets  extinguished  soon.  Such  unfavourable 
situation  goes  under  the  name  of  Kuja  Dosha. 

It  must  be  noted  that  in  determining  marriage  adaptability  between  two 
parties,  there  are  several  elements  of  much  more  importance  than  Kuja 
Dosha.  And  the  evil  influences  accuring  from  the  bad  position  of  Mars  is 
only  one  of  the  several  elements. 

It  is  unfortunate  that  throughout  South  India  especially  in  the  Tamil 
areas,  much  is  made  of  the  so-called  Kuja  Dosham  and  this  bugbear 
has  been  the  means  of  destroying  the  happiness  of  many  families  by 
preventing  marriages  otherwise  very  eligible  and  anxiously  wished  for. 
So  far  as  our  humble  experience  goes  it  is  only  in  the  Kerala  Sastra  that 
mention  is  made  of  Kuja  Dosha.  The  stanza  runs  thus:  Dhana  vyayecha 
pathale  jamitre  chashtame  kuja;  Strinam  bharthru  vinasamcha 
bharthunam  strivinasanam.  This  means:  - "If  Mars  is  in  the  2nd,  12th, 
4th,  7th  and  8th  houses  in  the  horoscope  of  the  female,  the  death  of  the 
husband  will  occur;  similar  situation  in  the  husband's  horoscope  causes 
the  death  of  wife." 

The  Lagna  represents  body,  the  Moon,  mind  and  Venus,  sexual 
relations.  Therefore,  the  houses  have  to  be  reckoned  with  reference  to 


all  the  three,  viz.,  Lagna,  Moon  and  Venus.  The  dosha  (evil)  is 
considered  weak  when  it  exists  from  Lagna,  a little  stronger  from  the 
Moon  and  still  more  powerful  from  Venus. 

The  second  house  signifies  family;  the  twelth  represents  comforts  and 
pleasures  of  bed.  The  fourth  rules  sukha  or  happiness.  The  seventh 
indicates  husband  and  eighth  represents  longevity  of  the  wife  or 
husband.  Hence  the  position  of  Mars  in  these  houses  is  supposed  to 
produce  this  peculiar  dosham  or  evil.  If  Kuja  Dosham  obtains  in  the 
horoscopes  of  both  the  bride  and  bridegroom,  the  dosham  gets 
cancelled.  There  are,  of  course,  many  good  combinations  which  assure 
marital  felicity  and  much  importance  need  not  be  given  to  Kuja  Dosham. 

Granting  that  Kuja  Dosham  is  a factor  whose  occurrence  should  not  be 
ignored,  there  are  antidotes  which  are  not  generally  known  to  the  rank 
and  file  of  Hindu  astrologers.  The  exceptions  are:  Mars  in  the  2nd  can 
be  said  to  be  bad  provided  such  2nd  house  is  any  other  than  Gemini 
and  Virgo;  in  the  12th  the  dosha  is  produced  when  such  12th  house  is 
any  other  than  Taurus  and  Libra  in  the  4th  house  Mars  causes  dosha 
provided  the  house  falls  in  any  sign  other  than  Aries  and  Scorpio;  when 
the  7th  is  other  than  Capricorn  and  Cancer,  the  dosha  is  given  rise  to; 
and  Mars  gives  bad  effects  in  the  8th,  provided  the  8th  is  any  other  than 
Sagittarius  and  Pisces.  In  Aquarius  and  Leo,  Mars  produces  no  dosha 
whatsoever.  The  dosha  is  counteracted  by  the  conjunction  of  Mars  and 
Jupiter  or  Mars  and  the  Moon;  or  by  the  presence  of  Jupiter  or  Venus  in 
the  ascendant. 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  Kuja  Dosha  does  not  deserve  that 
consideration  which  is  now  being  paid  to  it.  In  the  consideration  of 
marriage  adaptability  there  are  various  other  factors  which  should  be 
carefully  examined. 

We  have  dealt  above  fairly  exhaustively  with  the  question  of  marriage 
adaptability  and  have  tried  to  avoid  controversial  issues  as  the  book  is 
intended  for  the  common  man  who  wishes  to  take  advantage  of  the 
astrological  rules  to  his  benefit. 

Electing  a Time  for  Marriage 

Ordinarily  almost  every  Indian  Panchanga  gives  important  dates  and 
times  for  celebrating  marriages.  The  reader  cannot  rely  on  them  as 
most  of  the  dates  given  would  not  be  free  from  important  flaws. 


Moreover,  the  marriage  dates  selected  would  generally  be  in 
accordance  with  local  usages.  For  instance,  a Tamilian  would  not  mind 
marriage  being  performed  in  lunar  month  of  Ashadha  (provided  the  Sun 
has  not  entered  Cancer).  But  strong  objection  is  taken  to  this  by  people 
living  in  Andhra  and  Karnataka.  Apart  from  this,  there  is  universal 
agreement  all  over  India  as  regards  the  time,  weekday,  constellation 
and  planetary  positions  to  be  obtained  at  the  time  of  marriage. 

I am  giving  below  the  most  standard  methods  employed  by  scholars, 
warranted  by  experience  and  sanctioned  by  the  ancient  sages. 

The  lunar  months  of  Magha,  Phalguna,  Vaisakha  and  Jyeshta  are  good. 
Kartika  and  Margasira  are  ordinary.  The  rest  are  not  auspicious.  Some 
sages  opine  that  marriages  can  be  celebrated  in  Pushya  and  Chaitra 
provided  the  Sun  is  in  Capricorn  and  Aries  respectively. 

The  following  lunar  days,  viz.,  from  the  1 1th  day  (dark  half)  to  New 
Moon,  Riktha  Thithis,  8th,  12th  and  6th  should  be  rejected.  The  best 
lunar  days  are  the  2nd,  3rd,  5th,  7th,  1 0th,  1 1 th  and  1 3th  (of  the  bright 
half). 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  the  best.  Sunday  and 
Saturday  are  middling.  And  Tuesday  should  be  invariably  rejected. 

The  best  asterisms  are  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Makha,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Swati, 
Anuradha,  Moola,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati.  The  first 
quarter  of  Makha  and  Moola  and  the  last  quarter  of  Revati  are 
inauspicious  and  they  should  be  rejected.  Constellations  not  mentioned 
here  are  unsuitable  and  they  should  be  avoided. 

The  following  yogas  should  be  rejected:  Vyatipata,  Dhruva,  Mrityu, 
Ganda,  Vajra,  Soola,  Vishkambha,  Atiganda,  Vyaghata  and  Parigha. 

Vishtikarana  must  invariably  be  discarded. 

Among  the  zodiacal  signs  Gemini,  Virgo  and  Libra  are  the  best.  Taurus, 
Cancer,  Leo,  Sagittarius  and  Aquarius  are  middling.  The  rest  are 
inauspicious. 

In  the  election  of  a Muhurtha  for  marriage,  as  many  of  the  21  doshas 
(already  mentioned)  as  possible  should  be  avoided.  The  most  important 
considerations  however  are  (a)  The  7th  house  must  be  unoccupied  by 


any  planet,  (b)  Mars  should  not  be  in  the  8th,  (c)  Venus  should  not  be  in 
the  6th,  {d)  the  Lagna  should  not  be  hemmed  in  between  malefics,  (e) 
malefics  should  not  occupy  Lagna.  and  (f)  the  Moon  in  the  election  chart 
should  have  no  association  with  any  other  planet. 

Apart  from  the  above,  the  usual  Tarabala,  Panchaka.  etc.,  should  be 
looked  into.  Elsewhere  are  given  certain  special  combinations  which  are 
supposed  to  neutralise  adverse  influeces.  As  far  as  possible,  such 
combinations  should  be  applied  to  secure  a really  propitious  moment. 
Jupiter,  Mercury  or  Venus  in  Lagna,  malefics  in  the  3rd  or  1 1th,  would 
constitute  a formidable  force  in  rendering  the  Lagna  strong.  The 
following  are  some  of  the  special  combinations  which  are  supposed  to 
fortify  the  marriage  election  chart:  - 

(1)  Jupiter  in  the  ascendant,  Venus  in  the  8th  and  the  Sun  in  the  1 1th  - 
Mahendra  Yoga. 

(2)  Venus  in  Lagna.  Jupiter  in  the  10th  and  the  Sun  and  Mercury  in  the 
1 1th-Vishnu  Priya  Yoga. 

(3)  Venus  in  the  2nd,  Jupiter  in  the  12th,  the  Sun  in  the  8th  and  Saturn 
in  the  6th  - Sreenatha  Yoga. 

(4)  Venus  in  Lagna,  Jupiter  in  the  4th,  Mercury  in  the  2nd  and  Saturn  in 
the  1 1th  - Samudra  Yoga. 

(5)  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus  in  Lagna  - Vijaya  Yoga. 

(6)  Venus  and  Jupiter  in  Lagna  elevated  or  otherwise  strong  - Jaya 
Yoga. 

(7)  Saturn  in  the  3rd,  Jupiter  in  the  6th,  the  Sun  in  the  10th  and  Mars  in 
the  1 1th  - Pushya  Yoga. 

(8)  Mars  in  the  3rd,  Saturn  in  the  6th,  Venus  in  the  9th,  Jupiter  in  the 
12th  - Maharshi  Yoga. 

(9)  Venus  in  Lagna,  Jupiter  in  the  1 1th  - Ardhama  Yoga. 

Thus,  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Hindus  have  devised  an  astrological  means 
of  judging  marriage  compatibility  whereby  the  relations  between  the 
couple  may  stand  the  strain  of  maladjustment.  If  astrological  advices  are 


properly  heeded  to.  there  will  be  fewer  tragedies  than  at  present  and 
less  marital  infidelity.  Modern  sexologists  and  sociologists  will  do  well  to 
study  the  theory  behind  the  astrological  rules  bearing  on  marriage 
casting  off  their  prejudices  instead  of  criticising  and  condemning  the 
system. 


CHAPTER  X 

Elections  Concerning  General  Matters 

In  this  chapter,  I propose  to  deal  with  such  elections  as  have  a bearing 
on  the  personal  life  of  an  individual.  For  instance,  one  has  to  buy  or  sell 
shares,  buy  or  wear  new  clothes,  etc.  Auspicious  times  could  be  fixed 
for  all  such  important  daily  activities. 

Wearing  New  Clothes.  - Aswini.  Rohini,  Punarvasu,  Pushyami,  Uttara, 
Hasta,  Chitta,  Swati,  Visakha,  Dhanishta  and  Revati  are  the  best. 
Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  good.  Sunday  is 
middling.  Tuesday  and  Saturday  are  inauspicious.  The  4th,  9th,  14th 
lunar  days  and  New  Moon  day  should  be  avoided.  The  Moon  should  be 
as  far  as  possible  in  good  aspect  to  the  Sun. 

Forming  a Library.  - Mercury  should  be  in  exaltation  or  occupy  the 
Lagna.  Thursday  is  the  best.  Fortify  Lagna  by  placing  a malefic  in  the 
11th. 

Employ  ing  Servants.  - Avoid  Tuesdays  and  Saturdays.  Look  to  the 
strength  of  the  1 1th  house  lord.  Saturn  must  be  in  the  1 1th  free  from  the 
aspect  of  Mars  or  Rahu. 

Make  the  lord  of  the  sixth  occupy  the  1 1th  and  as  far  as  possible, 
choose  a fixed  sign.  Afflictions  to  Mercury  should  also  be  avoided  as 
they  bring  about  theft  in  the  house. 

Shaving.  - There  are  certain  people  who  seem  to  be  under  the  delusion 
that  the  ancients  were  a set  of  fools  and  that  their  observations  of 
phenomena  - in  their  various  aspects  - do  not  merit  the  attention  of  the 
modern  man.  Many  of  the  modern  scientific  discoveries  had  been 
anticipated  by  the  ancients.  Possessing  a splendid  language  which 
stands  unrivalled  even  to  this  day  in  its  powers  of  expression  and 
brevity,  they  employed  Sanskrit  words  which  embodied  their  scientific 
discoveries  unmistakably.  Intellectual  prejudices  go  a great  deal  to  warp 


the  judgement  of  even  the  greatest  men  and  some  so-called  men  of 
science  have  entirely  fallen  into  this  inviting  snare.  The  hair-spitting 
philosophers  of  the  East,  says  the  intellectual  upstart  of  the  modern  day, 
do  not  deserve  the  slightest  consideration  for  their  scientific  knowledge. 
The  means  by  which  the  ancient  Maharshis  pursued  their  intellectual 
studies  are  not  well  known  to  us,  but  the  fragments  of  literary  and 
scientific  works  left  to  us  by  the  Rishis  have  their  own  intrinsic  value. 

In  the  article  entitled  "Moon  and  Terrestrial  Life,  published  in  the  April 
1943  issue  of  The  Astrological  Magazine,  Mr.  M.  V.  Ramakrishnan  has 
shown  the  periodicity  existing  between  certain  happenings  on  terrestrial 
life  and  the  lunar  movements.  The  following  sentences  which  I am 
extracting  from  the  article  in  question  are  significant.  "Persons  who  wish 
their  hair  to  grow  dense  and  long  should  cut  it  in  the  first  half  of  the 
Moon.  Nails  should  be  cut  at  the  waxing  period  to  give  them  a good 
chance  of  growing."  Compare  this  with  the  principles  given  in  Muhurtha 
works  especially  regarding  the  injunctions  pertaining  to  shaving.  People 
seem  to  laugh  at  the  idea  when  astrologers  tell  them  that  they  should 
have  this  operation  on  particular  days  at  particular  times. 

The  science  of  electricity  was  known  to  the  ancients  and  it  was  the  late 
Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao  that  was  responsible  for  bringing  into  light  this 
important  fact.  The  human  body  is  a bundle  of  electrical  currents  and 
the  hairs  and  naits  are  channels  through  which  this  electricity  is 
discharged.  With  a view  to  concentrate  and  preserve  all  good  energies 
in  man  and  to  dissipate  and  get  rid  of  all  evil  forces  in  the  human  body, 
the  Maharshis  have  laid  down  certain  rules,  which  when  studied  by 
themselves  look  quite  arbitrary  and  meaningless,  but  which  when 
carefully  examined  in  the  light  of  conservation  of  energy  principle  look 
most  wonderful  and  striking  with  regard  to  the  knowledge  possessed  by 
them  in  physical  sciences. 

According  to  Maharshi  Vatsyayana,  akshi  (eyes),  vaksha  (chest),  kukshi 
(stomach),  sira  (head),  hridi  (heart),  hastam  (hands),  apatsu  (feminine 
sexual  organ),  nabhi  (navel),  medhra  (male  sexual  organ),  adhobhaga 
nalayuha  (lower  intestines),  buddisthana  (seat  of  intelligence  of  brain) 
and  brahmadanda  (the  seat  of  the  ray  of  the-Brahma)  are  all  seats  of 
electricity.  Hence  the  cutting  of  hair  from  the  head  means  so  much  loss 
of  vitality  of  the  body.  On  certain  lunar  days  owing  to  the  nature  of  the 
electrical  energies  coming  from  the  Moon-such  loss  of  vitality  from  the 
body  can  be  neutralised.  Hence  the  injunction  that  shaving  should  be 
had  recourse  to  at  such  times  as  would  minimise  or  neutralise  the  flow 


of  electric  currents  from  these  sources. 


If  a man  shaves  after  food,  he  commits  a great  blunder  as  the  electrical 
currents  from  his  body,  which  are  about  to  be  discharged  by  the 
digestion  of  food,  are  harmfully  interfered  with,  and  as  a natural 
consequence  his  health  may  be  affected  in  course  of  time.  Shaving 
means  cutting  off  hair  from  some  part  of  the  head  and  face  and  this 
again  means  loss  of  electricity  which  is  so  very  essential  for  the  proper 
upkeep  of  the  physical  and  mental  faculties  of  an  individual. 

People  inclined  towards  the  practice  of  spiritual  precepts  generally  grow 
beards.  The  idea  is  to  avoid  waste  of  energy.  Eye  defects,  loss  of 
memory,  loss  of  sight,  deafness  and  other  injurious  consequences  are 
directly  traceabie  to  promiscuous  shaving  without  reference  to  day  or 
time  and  many  physical  ills  of  man  may  be  minimised  by  regulating 
"Shaving"  in  the  light  of  astrological  principles. 

Shaving  may  be  had  in  the  constellation  of  Pushya,  Punarvasu,  Revat, 
Haste,  Sravana,  Dhanishta,  Mrigasira,  Aswini,  Chitta,  Jyeshta, 
Satabhisha  and  Swati.  4th,  6th  and  14th  lunar  days  as  also  New  Moon 
and  Full  Moon  days  are  not  desirable.  Similar  considerations  have  held 
good  in  the  matter  of  death  and  birth  pollution  and  solar  and  lunar 
eclipses.  The  ancients  studied  sciences  and  laid  down  strict  injunctions 
so  that  humanity  may  be  benefited.  They  did  not  believe  in  simply 
cataloguing  facts  as  we  in  modern  times  do.  These  may  be  sour  grapes 
for  those  who  are  blinded  by  thick  prejudices  but  they  are  sweet  for 
those  who  have  a clear  mental  vision  and  who  wish  to  economise  the 
waste  of  spiritual  energy  for  their  own  ultimate  good. 

Cutting  Nails.  - Avoid  Fridays  and  Saturdays  - the  8th,  9th,  14th  lunar 
days  as  well  as  New  and  Full  Moon  days.  Cutting  nails  means 
discharge  of  electricity  from  the  human  body  and  one  should  be  careful 
to  see  that  the  reaction  on  the  human  body  is  not  adverse. 

Buying  Utensils,  etc.  - Place  Jupiter  in  good  aspect  to  the  Moon  while 
buying  brass  vessels;  to  Mars  when  buying  vessels  of  copper;  to  Saturn 
if  steel  and  iron;  to  ascendant  if  of  silver.  Avoid  the  asterisms  of 
Aslesha.  Moola  and  Jyeshta.  For  buying  tools,  similarly  avoid  the  8th 
and  9th  lunar  days  and  New  Moon. 

Buying  Jewellery.  - The  Sun  and  the  Moon  should  be  well  situated  and 
aspected.  As  usual  unfavourable  lunar  days  and  asterisms  should  be 


avoided. 


Landing  Money.  - One  should  not  lend  money  on  days  ruled  by  Krittika, 
Makha,  Moola,  Satabhisha,  Uttara,  Punarvasu  or  one's  Janma 
Nakshatra  day.  One  should  try  to  receive  money  on  these  days. 
Tuesdays  and  Fridays  are  also  inauspicious.  Never  lend  money  on  a 
New  Moon  day  happening  to  be  Saturday.  The  lords  of  the  ascendant 
and  the  7th  should  be  harmoniously  disposed.  The  Moon's  situation  In 
Scorpio  is  bad  for  the  lender. 

Borrowing  Money.  - Do  not  borrow  money  on  days  ruled  by  Krittika, 
Moola,  Punarvasu,  Dhanishta  and  Janma  Nakshatra.  Moon's 
conjunction  with  Mars  and  Saturn  shouid  be  avoided  as  otherwise  there 
will  be  quarrels  and  litigation.  If  the  money  is  intended  for  quick  use  on 
domestic  or  personal  matters,  the.  Moon  should  be  in  good  aspect  to 
the  ascendant.  If  the  borrowed  money  is  to  be  spent  on  business  the 
Moon  must  be  in  a favourable  situation  with  regard  to  Mercury  and  lord 
of  Lagna.  For  any  election,  purity  of  lunar  day,  weekday,  any 
constellation  and  Tarabala  are  essential  and  further  considerations 
come  in  only  later  on. 

Buying  for  Business.  - Thursday,  the  1 0th  lunar  day  and  the 
constellation  of  Pushyami  are  the  best.  Tuesday  should  be  completely 
rejected.  Saturday  is  passable.  Mercury,  the  2nd  lord  and  the  2nd  house 
should  all  be  fortified.  Avoid  buying  for  trade  when  Mercury  is  afflicted 
by  Mars  as  this  will  destroy  stocks  and  cause  discord  and  wrangling. 
Mercury  and  Jupiter  in  conjunction  in  Lagna  or  in  mutual  aspects  would 
be  highly  propitious. 

Buying  Cattle.  - Monday,  Tuesday,  Wednesday  and  Saturday  are  good. 
The  lord  of  the  day  in  question  should  occupy  the  rising  sign  at  the  time 
of  transaction.  To  buy  sheep  the  propitoius  time  is  that  on  a Thursday 
ruled  by  Pushya  when  Aries  is  rising. 

Selling  for  Profit.  - Let  the  Moon  and  Mercury  be  free  from  the 
conjunction  or  aspect  of  Mars.  The  Moon's  situation  in  Taurus.  Cancer 
or  Pisces  would  greatly  help  the  seller.  Try  to  keep  Mercury  in  a kendra 
from  Lagna  or  at  least  in  good  aspect  to  Jupiter.  Tuesday  should  be 
avoided.  Monday,  Wednesday  and  Thursday  are  the  best.  While  Friday 
is  unpropitious,  Saturday  is  middling. 

Shifting  from  Place  to  Place.  More  details  are  given  in  Chapter  XIII.  If 


one  is  to  move  urgently  from  one  place  to  another.  Janma  Nakshatra 
should  be  avoided.  Anuradha,  Mrigasira  and  Hasta  are  the  best. 

Journey  on  the  9th  lunar  day  is  prohibited.  Yet  in  cases  of  urgency,  one 
can  move  at  a propitious  moment.  If  you  desire  pecuniary  gain  conform 
to  all  the  astrological  requirements  suggested  in  Chapter  XIV.  In  any 
case,  let  there  be  Tarabala  and  Chandrabala  and  let  the  ascendant  be 
fortified.  The  Moon  and  the  ascendant  should  both  be  in  fixed  signs. 
Jupiter  or  Venus  should  be  in  an  angle  preferably  in  the  ascendant  or 
the  10th. 

Recovering  Money  Dua.  - The  lord  of  Lagna  should  be  strong  and  the 
election  rising  sign  should  not  fall  in  the  8th  or  9th  from  the  radical  rising 
sign.  The  lords  of  Lagna  and  the  2nd  must  also  be  well  situated. 

Pledging.  - Articles  pledged  under  Visakha,  Krittika  (Sadhana),  Bharani, 
Makha,  Pubba,  Poorvashadha,  Poorvabhadra  (Vajra),  Aridra,  Aslesha, 
Jyeshta  arid  Moola  (Theeshana)  do  not  return.  Jupiter  and  the  Moon 
should  be  mutually  well  disposed.  Tuesdays  and  Fridays  are 
inauspicious  as  also  lunar  days  declared  generally  evil. 

Making  a Will.  - The  Moon,  the  Lagna  and  the  lord  of  the  Lagna  should 
all  be  in  fixed  signs.  The  constellation  of  Pushyami  is  the  best  as  also 
Wednesday  and  Thursday  - Tuesday  and  Friday  should  be  avoided.  For 
the  benefit  of  the  legatee,  the  rising  sign  should  be  one  of  Jupiter  or 
Venus.  Let  Mars  and  Saturn  be  in  the  3rd  or  1 1th  house.  The  8th  house 
must  also  be  rendered  strong  as  otherwise  the  testator  will  die. 

CHAPTER  XI 

Elections  Pertaining  to  Education 

According  to  ancient  sages  Vidya  or  Education  comprises  the  study  of 
the  Vedas,  Vedangas,  Mimamsa,  Dharmasastras,  Medicine,  Music, 
Political  Sciences  and  Economic  subjects.  Elaborate  treatises  exist  on 
all  these  subjects.  In  order  to  get  proficiency  in  the  different  branches  of 
knowledge,  education  should  be  commenced  under  auspicious 
planetary  influences.  Each  subject  in  which  mastery  is  desired  calls  for 
concentration-to  be  applied  in  a particular  form  with  a view  to  tapping 
the  intellectual  resources  of  the  particular  type-latent  in  the  brain  cells. 
Astrological  consultation  is  held  to  facilitate  such  concentration  as  the 
moment  selected  for  commencing  the  study  of  a particular  subject  is 
supposed  to  tune  the  mental  currents  to  be  in  harmony  with  the  natural 


forces. 


The  most  beneficial  constellations  for  commencing  education  are 
Mrigasira,  Aridra,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Swat},  Sravana, 
Dhanishta  and  Satabhisha.  Aswini  is  held  by  some  writers  to  be  one  of 
the  best.  Rohini,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  and  Revati  are  neutral.  The 
remaining  ones  are  to  be  rejected. 

Tuesday  and  Saturday  should  invariably  be  avoided.  Sunday  can  be 
considered  permissible  if  other  atrological  conditions  are  satisfactory. 
The  following  lunar  - days  are  auspicious:  - 1st  (of  dark  half),  2nd,  3rd, 
5th,  6th,  1 0th  and  1 1 th.  The  4th,  8th,  9th,  1 4th  and  New  and  Full  Moon 
days  should  be  avoided. 

The  Lagna  should  not  be  a fixed  sign.  Common  signs  are  the  best  and 
the  movable  ones  ordinary. 

In  commencing  education  - be  it  of  any  type  - one  should  have  regard  to 
two  important  Yogas  given  below:  - 

Saraswati  Yoga  - 

(a)  Wednesday  coinciding  with  Hasta,  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  being 
Gemini  or  Virgo  with  the  Sun,  Moon  and  Mercery  occupying  the  Amsa 
of  Mercury. 

(b)  Wednesday  at  sunrise  when  Mercury  is  in  deep  exaltation. 

(c)  Wednesday,  when  Mercury  is  in  Lagna  and  occupies  the  3rd  quarter 
of  Hasta. 

(d)  Jupiter  in  deep  exaltation  in  Lagna  on  days  other  than  Saturday  and 
Sunday. 

Vidya  Yoga  - 

(a)  Friday  when  Pisces  is  rising  and  Venus  occupies  the  27th  degree  of 
the  same  sign. 

(b)  Jupiter  in  deep  exaltation  and  Cancer  rising  on  Thursday. 

(c)  The  day  and  constellation  being  propitious,  the  Sun  must  be  placed 
in  his  own  Hora. 


If  education  were  to  progress  satisfactorily,  one  must  have  due  regard 
to  the  following  considerations  also. 

The  forenoon  and  the  noon  are  the  best.  Malefics  should  be  disposed  in 
die  3rd,  6th  and  1 1th  houses.  The  8th  house  should  be  clean  and 
unoccupied  by  benefic  or  malefic  planets.  For  starting  education, 
Wednesday  morning  would  be  the  befit  provided  the  election  chart  is 
otherwise  well  disposed  and  strong. 

Learning  Vedas  and  Sasrras.  - Pushyami,  Dhanishta  and  Sravana  are 
auspicious  ones.  Let  Jupiter  be  as  strong  as  possible. 

Learning  Astrology  and  Astronomy.  - Aswini,  Punarvasu,  Pushyami, 
Hasta,  Swati,  Moola  and  Revati  are  good. 

Learning  Grammar.  Logic  and  Philosophy.  - Rohini,  Mrigasira, 
Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Hasta,  Dhanishta  and  Revati  are  favourable 
constellations  for  learning  Grammar  while  for  the  other  subjects 
Sravana,  Satabhisha,  Hasta,  Uttara,  Moola  and  Revati  are  good.  The 
intellectual  planet  Mercury  should  be  fortified  as  usual. 

Learning  Medicine.  - Dhanishta  is  the  best  constellation  not  only  for 
beginning  the  study  of  medicine  but  also  for  learning  the  use  of  firearms. 
An  affliction  to  Mars  by  Saturn  should  be  avoided.  Let  the  rising  sign  or 
Navamsa  be  that  of  Mars  or  the  Sun. 

To  Learn  Music  and  Dancing.  - Let  Venus  be  as  strongly  placed  as 
possible  avoiding  affliction  by  Rahu  or  Saturn,  as  this  is  said  to  lead  to 
an  immoral  career.  Hasta,  Pushyami,  Dhanishta,  Anuradha,  Jyeshta, 
Revati,  Satabhisha,  Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra  are  the  best. 
Harmonious  aspects  should  exist  between  Jupiter  and  Venus.  Place  the 
lord  of  Lagna  in  the  5th  or  9th  and  see  that  these  two  houses  are  free 
from  affliction.  Mercury-Venus  conjunction  in  Lagna  would  be  highly 
propitious. 

Learning  any  Science.  - The  Study  of  any  science  can  be  commenced 
either  in  a Saraswati  Yoga  or  in  a Vidya  Yoga  under  any  of  the  special 
combinations  mentioned  above. 

Learning  a Trade.  - The  planet  ruling  the  avocation  should  be  well 
disposed  in  regard  to  the  ascendant  and  free  from  affliction.  The 
following  are  the  occupations  governed  by  the  different  planets. 


The  SUN  denotes  kings,  members  of  political  department,  ministers, 
magistrates,  lawyers  and  civil  servants.  The  Sun  favourably  situated  in 
relation  to  the  10th  house  bestows  professions  of  the  above  nature.  The 
MOON  rules  over  nurses,  midwives,  jewellers,  dealers  in  pearls  and 
precious  metals,  and  also  governmental  activities.  MARS  produces 
soldiers,  warriors,  carpenters,  mechanics,  surveyors,  chemists,  bankers, 
commanders,  insurance  agents,  and  butchers.  MERCURY  gives  rise  to 
preceptors  or  school  masters,  mathematicians,  authors,  printers, 
secretaries,  book-sellers,  accountants  and  insurance  agents.  JUPITER 
makes  one  a priest,  a lawyer,  a councillor,  judge,  scholar  and  a public 
man.  VENUS  produces  artistes,  musicians,  actors,  perfumers,  jewellers, 
winesellers  and  solicitors  with  a keen  intellect.  SATURN  governs 
different  kinds  of  professions  involving  responsibility  and  subordination, 
mill  hands,  compositors,  hawkers,  factory  workers,  scavengers  and 
manual  workers  in  general. 

The  planet  in  question  may  also  occupy  the  1 0th  house  aspected  by 
benefics.  Tuesday  must  be  avoided  for  learning  any  trade. 

CHAPTER  XII 
House  Building 

The  instinct  to  possess  a house  is  to  be  found  not  only  in  man,  the 
acme  of  creation,  but  throughout  the  animal  kingdom.  The  cells  of  bee's 
honey-comb  are  models  of  economy  and  mathematical  skill  while  the 
ant-hills  are  noted  for  their  strength.  Man  cannot  be  an  exception  to  this 
primary  instinct.  Unfortunately,  man,  due  to  pride  and  arrogance,  fails  to 
give  the  thought  and  attention  due  to  astrological  factors  which  are  as 
important  as  the  selection  of  a site  or  planning  of  the  building. 

In  Sanskrit,  house-building  goes  under  the  name  of  Vastu  Shastra  and  a 
lot  of  useful  literature  composed  by  great  sages  are  extant  on  this  most 
important  subject.  It  must  be  within  the  experience  of  a number  of 
persons  that  in  spite  of  the  best  engineering  skill  displayed  in  the 
construction  of  a house,  it  would  sometimes  be  lacking  what  is  usually 
termed  the  'charm'  with  the  result  the  builder  does  not  feel  really  happy 
at  all.  In  India  at  least  mere  external  appearance,  however  attiiactive. 
does  not  give  the  owner  the  mental  satisfaction  that  a man  Of  slender 
means  enjoys  when  the  house  is  built  in  confofmity  wrth  astrological 
canons.  So  strong  is  the  sentiment  that  even  the  most  educated  and 
"cultured"  modern  man  would  not  afford  to  take  risks  in  laying  the 


foundation-stone  or  fixing  the  door-frame  or  entering  the  house  without 
reference  to  astrological  factors. 

A house  may  look  grand  and  attractive  on  the  outside,  may  command 
and  may  possess  all  the  anpurtenances  according  to  sanitary  principles. 
Here  the  external  factors,  which  we  shall  term  the  morphology  of  a 
house,  are  intact.  But  what  about  the  internal  or  psychological  factors 
involved?  Every  object  in  nature  has  the  power  of  radiating  cosmic  force 
in  some  form  or  other.  The  materials  collected  for  building  a structure 
and  the  commencement  of  the  structure  itself  involve  the  influx  and 
interaction  of  a series  of  such  invisible  forces  that  the  time  selected 
should  be  capable  of  exerting  forces  harmonious  to  such  invisible 
radiations.  The  ancient  Maharshis  had  realised  the  importance  of  the 
interplay  of  such  forces  between  objects  in  nature  and  man,  though,  in 
recent  times,  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of  a Russian  scientist  and  engineer, 
Georges  Lakhovsky,  to  demonstrate  its  reality. 

All  objects  in  nature,  whether  mineral,  vegetable  or  animal,  are 
produced  and  destroyed  under  the  influence  of  the  solar  ray  and  its 
various  modifications.  Many  of  the  great  buildings,  intended  for  the  use 
of  an  individual,  community  or  a nation,  have  caused  ruin  to  the  parties 
concerned.  It  cannot  be  said  that  those  buildings  which  have  inflicted 
loss  or  ruin  to  the  promoters  of  the  schemes  had  no  good  engineering 
skill  bestowed  on  them.  When  large  sums  of  money  are  spent  on  such 
undertakings,  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  best  Intellects  in  the  field 
of  engineering  had  been  consulted  and  the  greatest  care  had  been 
taken  in  collecting  proper  materials.  If  the  best  heads  and  the  best 
materials  are  used,  it  Is  natural  to  suppose  that  the  results  would  also 
be  most  satisfactory. 

On  the  contrary,  we  find  that  some  buildings  are  spared  the  ruthless 
hands  of  time,  some  others  crash  very  soon;  some  bring  prosperity  to 
the  owner  while  some  bring  about  unhappiness,  misery  and  ultimate 
destruction.  It  cannot  be  an  accident  that  while  some  buildings  are 
spared  the  ruthless  hands  of  wild  conquerors,  others  close  to  them,  or 
forming  part  and  parcel  of  them,  get  destroyed  under  exceptional 
circumstances.  There  must  surely  be  some  reason  for  these  variations 
in  the  ups  and  downs  in  the  life  of  a building.  The  causes  for  these  have 
to  be  searched  far  behind  the  superficial  strata  of  argument  and 
ordinary  conception.  The  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  great  works 
on  astrology  composed  by  the  sages. 


If  a construction  is  begun  at  a time  when  the  strength  of  the  materials  is 
found  in  plenty  - which  can  be  ascertained  by  the  rules  of  astrology, 
when  the  influences  which  work  against  the  forces  of  cohesion; 
adhesion  and  chemical  combination,  etc.,  are  counteracted  by  zodiacal 
and  stellar  influences,  when  the  magnetic  currents  are  favourable  to  the 
union  and  permanency  of  the  materials,  it  is  said  to  prosper  long. 

There  is  an  important  branch  of  astrology  dealing  with  this  absorbing 
subject  under  the  name  of  Vastu  Sastra  and  its  study  is  very  material  to 
the  securing  of  permanency  and  prosperity,  to  the  buildings  constructed. 
The  mysterious  influence  of  time  (Kalapurusha)  is  well  marked.  It 
accounts  for  the  neglect  or  care  of  these  buildings,  their  dilapidation  or 
freshness,  their  occupation  by  men  in  power  or  by  owls  and  other  birds 
of  illomen,  their  being  covered  up  by  mounds  of  earth  or  sand,  and 
discovered  after  a long  series  of  future  generations  to  furnish  facts  and 
evidences  for  civilization  which  have  disappeared,  for  societies  which 
have  passed  away  and  for  knowledge  of  construction  which  was 
concealed  in  the  Little  Heads  which  planned  their  commencement. 

The  combinations  of  planets  at  the  time  of  commencement,  the  position 
and  strength  of  constellation,  the  waning  and  waxing  of  the  ever 
unsteady  Moon,  the  rising  or  sinking  of  the  principal  designer,  and  the 
Luck  of  the  party,  who  first  lays  the  foundation-stone,  hate  their  own 
influence  1 0 exert. 

The  animal  magnetism  of  the  principle  man  has  much  to  do  with  the 
prosperity  of  the  edifice  and  also  his  heart  and  soul  with  reference  to 
community  who  are  to  be  profited  by  the  construction.  It  is  not  astrology 
and  sheer  superstition  when  a lucky  king  or  governor  or  president  is 
asked  to  open  an  institution,  to  unveil  a statue,  to  lay  the  foundation- 
stone  for  large  buildings,  and  dig  but  a bit  of  earth  for  the  success  of  the 
undertaking?  These  are  the  legitimate  works  of  the  humblest  coolies, 
and  if  astrology  has  no  hold,  if  influence  of  Luck  has  no  place,  why  on 
earth  do  the  most  enlightened  nations  invite  the  luckiest  man  to  open 
such  proceedings? 

Laying  stones  or  digging  the  earth  is  not  the  legitimate  function  of  any 
so-called  big  man.  On  the  other  hand,  it  belongs  to  the  ordinary  labourer 
who  is  present  on  the  spot.  If  the  most  civilised  nations  of  the  earth  do 
not  believe  in  such  Nonsense  as  luck  and  astrology  let  them  not  be 
making  themselves  fools  by  resorting  to  such  stupid  ceremonies. 


People  are  not  frank.  They  do  one  thing  and  preach  another.  It  is  better 
that  if  they  have  no  belief  at  all  in  the  science  of  astrology  they  may  not 
enact  "tom  fooleries"  on  ignorant  and  superstitious  humanity. 

The  Muhurtham  refers  to  auspicious  combination  of  various  planetary 
influences,  and  the  Worship  offered  during  such  occasions  before  the 
work  is  commenced,  has  special  reference  to  the  ave  ting  of  'evils' 
which  may  be  in  store  for  the  Buildings  under  question. 

Astrology,  as  applied  to  engineering,  goes  under  the  special  name  of 
Vastu  Sastra  and  merits  deep  study  and  understanding  by  modern 
engineers. 

The  construction  of  a house  according  to  astrological  works  involves 
four  important  stages,  viz.,  (1)  Laying  the  foundation,  (2)  Digging  the 
well,  (3)  Fixing  the  door-frames,  and  (4)  Entry  into  the  new  house.  Of 
the  four  stages,  the  first  and  the  last  are  very  important  and  significant. 

Laying  the  Foundation.  - According  to  ancient  astrological  savants  just 
as  Kalapurusha  personifies  Time,  Vastu  Purusha  personifies  the  House. 
The  Vastu  Purusha  is  said  to  sleep  on  his  left  with  his  head  to  the  East 
during  the  months  of  Bhadrapada,  Aswayuja  and  Kartika  (August  to 
October);  with  his  head  to  the  South  during  Margasira.  Pushya  and 
Magha  (November  to  February);  with  his  head  to  the  West 
during. Phalguna,  Chaitra  and  Vaisakha  (February  to  May)  and  with  his 
head  to  the  North  during  Jyeshta,  Ashadha  and  Sravana  (May  to 
August).  No  building  should  be  erected  on  the  ground  covered  by  his 
head,  his  legs,  his  hands  and  his  back,  as  it  is  said  to  prove  fatal  to  the 
father,  wife  and  children  respectively  and  cause  fear  of  thieves.  The 
most  suitable  section  would  be  the  ground  covered  by  the  stomach  of 
Vastu  Purusha  as  it  gives  rise  to  plenty  and  prosperity. 

No  house-building  should  be  commenced  in  the  lunar  months  of 
Jyeshta,  Ashadha,  Bhadrapada,  Aswayuja,  Margasira,  Pushya  and 
Phalguna  as  they  connote  respectively  death,  destruction,  disease, 
quarrels  and  misunderstandings,  loss  of  wealth,  incendiarism  and 
physical  danger  The  lunar  months  of  Chaitra,  Vaisakha,  Sravana, 

Kartika  and  Magha  are  the  best.  The  Sun  should  occupy  fixed  signs  or 
at  least  movable  signs  but  no  building  work  should  be  undertaken  when 
the  Sun  is  in  common  signs. 


Rohirii,  Mrigasira,  Chitta,  Hasta,  Jyeshta,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  and 


Sravana  are  the  best  constellations  to  lay  the  foundation, 


Swati,  Pushya,  Anuradha,  Aswini,  Satabhisha,  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati 
are  ordinary  or  middling  while  the  remaining  twelve  asterisms  should 
invariably  be  avoided. 

All  odd  tithis  (lunar  days)  except  the  9th  are  good.  Of  the  even  tithis  the 
2nd,  6th  and  10th  are  auspicious.  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and 
Friday  are  the  best,  Even  Monday  should  be  rejected  when  the  Moon  is 
waning.  Sunday  and  Saturday  are  approved  by  some  but  in  our  opinion 
Saturday  should  be  rejected  as  it  connots  frequent  thefts.  Sunday 
should  also  be  avoided  unless  the  day  is  otherwise  very  auspicious. 

Fixed  signs  are  the  best.  Movable  signs,  should  be  rejected.  Common 
signs  may  he  preferred  provided  they  are  occupied  by  strong  benefics. 

In  movable  signs  and  fixed  navamsas  can  also  be  considered  in  cases 
of  urgency,  subject  to  the  satisfactory  disposition  of  other  astrological 
factors.  The  rising  sign,  at  the  time  of  laying  the  foundation  should  be 
highly  fortified  by  the  disposition  of  malefics  in  3rd,  6th  and  1 1th  houses 
and  benefics  in  kendras  and  trines.  The  8th  house  should  be  vacant  and 
in  no  case  should  it  have  the  aspect  of  malefic  planet. 

The  following  are  some  of  the  special  combinations  recommended  as 
highly  propitious  by  aincient  astrological  writers  for  laying  the  foundation 
so  that  the  house  could  last  long  and  ensure  happiness  and  prosperity 
to  the  owner  as  well  as  the  tenant. 

Foundation  is  to  be  laid  in  Cancer,  the  superstructure  erected  in  Gemini 
or  Virgo  and  the  roofing  done  in  Taurus  or  Libra.  The  house  becomes, 
fire-proof.  A house  built  when  Jupiter  or  Venus  is  in  Lagna,  end  the  Sun 
exactly  on  the  meridian  or  at  the  western  horizon,  is  supposed  to  last  for 
at  least  one  hundred  years. 

When  the  1 0th  house  is  occupied  by  the  Moon,  the  4th  by  Jupiter  and 
the  11  th  by  Mars  and  Saturn,  the  house  will  remain  undestroyed  for  at 
least  80  years. 

Jupiter  in  Lagna,  Mercury  in  the  7th,  Saturn  in  the  3rd,  the  Sun  and 
Venus  in  the  6th,  the  house  will  stand  for  a century. 

Mercury  occupying  Lagna,  Jupiter  the  7th  and  the  Moon  the  10th 
indicate  similar  stability. 


Varahamihira  suggests  that  after  finishing  the  puja,  the  first  foundation  - 
stone  shall  be  laid  on  the  north-eastern  corner  of  the  site. 

Fixing  the  Door  - Frame.  - The  Hindus  attach  special  significance  to  the 
fixing  of  door-frames.  Even  today  the  so-called  educated  man  publicly 
scoffing  at  astrology  stealthily  consults  an  astrologer  in  private,  and  gets 
an  auspicious  time  for  fixing  door-frames.  Probably  the  door-frames 
have  the  peculiarity  of  attracting  the  best  electric  and  magnetic  forces 
from  the  atmosphere.  Then  fixed  in  auspicious  times  - times  at  which 
the  different  planetary  bodies  would  be  so  disposed  as  to  concentrate 
the  maximum  of  benefic  influence.  The  door-frame  should  always  be 
fixed  at  a time  when  the  rising  sign  is  a fixed  one.  Rohini,  Mrigasira, 
Uttara,  Chitta,  Anuradha,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati  may 
be  elected.  The  tithi  (lunar  day),  asterism,  the  day  and  the  rising  sign 
should  all  be  carefully  selected,  for  the  moment  of  fixing  the  door-frame 
has  an  important  bearing  upon  the  prosperity  of  the  master.  The  doors, 
etc.,  maybe  furnished  on  Wednesday  or  Friday  ruled  by  any  beneficial 
lunar  day,  a common  sign  and  any  of  the  following  constellations,  viz., 
Aswini,  Pushya,  Nasta,  Rohini,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra. 

The  durability  or  duration  of  a dwelling  house  in  a state  of  prosperity 
should  be  determined  from  the  moment  at  which  the  foundation-stone  is 
laid.  Foundations  laid  under  the  following  combinations  assure 
prosperity  and  a long  life  for  the  house  to  be  constructed. 

(1)  From  the  Lagna,  the  Moon  should  be  in  the  10th;  Jupiter  in  the  14th 
and  Mars  and  Saturn  in  the  1 1th.  (2)  Jupiter  in  Lagna,  Mercury  in  the 
7th,  Saturn  in  the  3rd,  the  Sun  in  the  6th  and  Venus  in  the  4th.  (3)  The 
rising  sign  should  be  occupied  by  Venus,  the  10th  house  by  Mercury, 
any  kendra  by  Jupiter  and  the  1 1th  by  the  Sun.  (4)  The  Moon  in  the 
rising  sign,  Jupiter  in  the  7th  and  Mercury  in  the  10th.  (5)  Venus  in  the 
1 0th,  Jupiter  in  the  7th  and  Mercury  in  Lagna  - which  should  be  a fixed 
sign.  (6)  Jupiter  in  Lagna  (fixed)  Mercury  in  the  7th  and  the  Moon  in  the 
10th. 

Any  of  the  above  planetary  positions  at  the  moment  of  laying  the 
foundation  will  establish  the  building  in  prosperity  for  a long  number  of 
years. 

Jupiter  in  combination  with  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Aslesha,  Uttara. 
Poorvashadha,  Uttarashadha,  Sravana  and  Uttarabhadra,  on  a 
Thursday  forms  what  is  known  as  Rajayoga  and  this  is  considered  very 


fortunate  for  starting  the  construction  of  a house. 


Digging  Wells.  - The  object  of  sinking  a well  is  to  get  a perpetual  supply 
of  clean  and  healthy  drinking  water.  Varahamihira  deals  exclusively  with 
the  topic  of  divining  the  presence  of  water  by  reference  to  the  growth  of 
certain  types  of  vegetation.  The  water  falling  from  the  clouds  is  soaked 
into  the  earth  and  according  to  internal  conditions,  runs  into  different 
channels.  These  channels  of  water  are  what  are  called  under-currents. 
The  type  of  vegetation  present  in  the  soil  is  said  to  give  a clue  to  the 
distance  of  these  under-currents  from  the  ground  level.  For  instance, 
Varahamihira  says  that  if  one  sees  a Vetasa  (Calamus  viminalis)  plant 
in  a waterless  tract,  one  can  find  water  by  digging  the  ground  at  a 
distance  of  3 cubits  to  the  west  of  it,  half  a purusa  (about  3 1/2,  feet) 
below  the  earth.  These  can  be  easily  tested  by  our  water-diviners  before 
condemning  them  as  antiquated  or  superstitious.  Soil  conditions  are 
influenced  by  climatic  factors  which  in  their  turn  have  reference  to 
planetary  radiations.  Therefore  when  wells  are  dug  under  favourable 
planetary  conditions,  a plentiful  supply  of  water  is  expected  without 
much  expense. 

Revati,  Uttarabhadra,  Hasta,  Anuradha,  Makha,  Sravana,  Rohini  and 
Pushyami  are  favourable  for  digging  wells.  The  rising  sign  should  be 
Pisces,  Cancer  or  Capricorn.  Aquarius  and  Taurus  will  not  give  a good 
supply  of  water.  Venus  and  the  Moon  should  be  in  kepdras.  If  the 
digging  operation  is  begun  in  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun,  delay  will  be 
caused  on  account  of  the  presence  of  hard-rock.  An  abundant  supply  of 
sweet  water  is  indicated  when  the  Moon  or  Venus  is  in  a quadrant 
identical  with  a full  watery  sign.  Venus  and  Moon  are  watery  planets, 
while  Cancer,  Capricorn  and  Pisces  (full)  are  watery  signs. 

Entering  a New  House.  - If  the  house,  which  one  has  built,  is  calculated 
to  give  happiness  to  the  family,  one  must  take  proper  astrological 
counsel  in  entering  it  under  a propitious  moment.  Soon  after  the  eventful 
day  - the  day  on  which  one's  house  is  first  occupied  - if  per  chance 
something  untoward  happens,  he  will  not  only  be  heckled  sarcastically 
by  the  family  members,  but  his;  pride  of  possession  disappears  and  he 
feels  life  not  worth  living  though  his  sense  of  vanity  would  not  allow  him 
to  own  his  short-sightedness. 

Entering  new  houses  will  be  a matter  of  great  importance  as  the  results 
produced  by  the  local  magnetic  and  electrical  currents  at  the  time  of  the 
entry  of  the  family  into  it,  may  leave  upon  its  members  very  far-reaching 


influences  for  good  or  bad.  There  is  no  mythology  or  superstition  here. 
All  human  actions  are  productive  of  electrical  currents. 

"Vastu  refers  to  the  form  of  construction  of  the  house,  and  the  energies 
or  forces  called  into  existence  by  the  arrangements  made  and  the 
materials  used  in  the  construction.  The  subtle  chemical  results,  effected 
by  the  conjunction  of  various  materials,  though  not  seen  by  the  naked, 
eye,  are  still  there  and  any  evil  tendencies  they  may  have,  to  produce 
danger,  disease,  or  death  to  the  occupants,  must  be  very  sensibly  and 
dexterously  neutralised  or  counteracted.  Therefore  the  astrological 
works  lay  down  certain  principles  and  they  are  explained  in  the  Mantra 
Shastra,  where  the  processes  by  which  those  evil  influences  are 
averted  are  detailed  at  great  length."* 

* The  Astrological  Mirror  by  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao. 

New  houses  should  be  entered  when  the  Sun  is  in  Uttarayana,  and 
when  Jupiter  and  Venus  are  strongly  disposed,  after  necessary 
worships  and  Bhootabali. 

"Then  term  Bhootas  is  generally  applied  to  represent  the  influences  of 
the  earth,  fire,  water.  Sky  and  air  and  the  various  compounds  called  into 
existence  by  their  union.  When  special  classes  of  materials  and  life 
beings  - including  men  and  cattle  - were  absent  from  a particular  plot  or 
piece  of  ground  the  influences  of  the  Bhootas  (forces  or  energies)  were 
naturally  working  in  their  own  inscrutable  ways. 

"But  the  advent  of  new  forms  of  energies  or  forces  will  certainly  have 
their  own  influences  and  if  the  first  set  of  Maha-Bhootas  are  found  to  be 
inimicable  to  the  second  set  of  forces,  which  are  brought  upon  them  for 
safety  and  prosperity,  it  becomes  the  duty  of  intelligent  beings  like  men, 
to  study  the  first  set  of  physical  and  spiritual  energies  which  had  their 
permanent  abode  in  them,  so  that  the  second  set  may  not  suffer  from 
the  "frowns"  of  the  first  set,  and  thus,  have  the  very  same  objects 
defeated  for  gaining  which  men  spent  so  much  money,  time  and  mental 
labour.  Bhootabali  therefore  will  be  the  special  sacrifices  which  are 
enjoined  upon  men  to  offer  to  the  Bhootas  (forces)  in  the  new  house 
before  they  enter  into  the  same  and  seek  safety  under  its  roof." 

The  lunar  months  of  Vaisakha,  Jyeshta,  Magha  and  Phalguna  are  the 
best  while  Kartika  and  Margasira  are  neutral  or  middling.  The  most 
auspicious  lunar  days  are  the  first  of  the  dark  fortnight,  2nd,  3rd,  5th, 


7th,  1 0th,  1 1th  and  1 3th  of  the  bright  half. 


Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Uttarashada,  Chitta  and  Uttarabhadra  are  the  best 
constellations.  Anuradha  and  Revati  are  also  permissible.  The  other 
constellations  should  be  rejected. 

Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are  auspicious.  Saturday  is 
also  recommended  by  some  Muhurtha  writers,  but  there  is  risk  of 
frequent  thefts. 

The  Lagna  or  the  ascendant  should  be  a fixed  sign.  Common  signs  are 
ordinary  white  movable  signs  should  be  generally  avoided.  Provided, 
however,  the  Navamsa  Lagna  is  Taurus,  a movable  sign  may  be 
selected.  The  8th  house  from  the  Lagna  should  be  vacant. 

Malefics  should  be  disposed  in  Upachayas,  benefics  should  fortify 
quadrants,  the  Moon  must  be  strongly  disposed  and  the  rising  sign 
should  preferably  be  owned  by  Jupiter  or  Venus.  When  entry  into  a new 
house  is  effected  under  such  a combination,  prosperity  and  long  fife  are 
said  to  be  conferred  on  the  person  concerned.  Griha  Pravesam.  done  in 
one's  own  Janma  Rasi.  Janma  Nakshatra  or  Janma  Lagna,  will  produce 
highly  beneficial  results 

Griha  Pravesam  should  not  be  done  when  the  wife  is  in  advanced 
pregnancy  (above  6 months). 

Buying  Lands  for  Buildings.  - The  best  asterisms  for  buying  a land  are 
Aswini,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Pushyami,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Swati, 
Anuradha,  Uttarashadha,  Sravana,  Dharushta,  Satabhisha  and 
Uttarabhadra.  Riktha  tithis  must  be  scrupulously  avoided.  Monday, 
Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Saturday  are  good. 

It  would  be  better  if  the  lord  of  the  weekday  concerned  occupies  the 
Lagna  at  the  time  of  the  transaction.  Some  ancient  astrological  works 
recommend  Tuesday  also  as  suitable.  But  in  our  humble  view,  Tuesday 
should  be  rejected. 

At  the  time  of  making  the  final  negotiations,  let  preferably  a fixed  sign 
rise  and  let  Jupiter  occupy  a kendra  or  trikona.  Mars  should  be  placed  in 
the  1 1th  house  and  he  should  not  be  in  Lagna.  The  lords  of  Lagna  and 
the  7th  should  be  harmoniously  disposed.  Avoid  the  1 1th  lord  in  the 
12th. 


The  land  can  be  taken  possession  of  when  the  Lagna  and  Navamsa  are 
occupied  by  the  Sun  and  Ketu.  When  these  planets  are  together  in 
Lagna  or  Navamsa,  the  land  is  supposed  to  remain  with  the  purchaser, 
permanently. 

Buying  Houses.  - As  usual  Nanda*  thithis  ate  favourable.  New  and  old 
houses  can  be  purchased  on  Thurs-  days  and  Fridays.  The  auspicious 
constellations  are  Mrigasira,  Aslesha,  Makha,  Pubba,  Visakha,  Moota, 
Punarvasu  and  Revati.  Taurus,  Gemini,  Leo,  Libra  and  Scorpio  are  the 
best  signs.  Malefics  should  be  avoided  in  the  7th  house,  as  they  may 
cause  trouble  and  annoyance.  Mars  should  not  be  in  Lagna. 

* See  appendix  for  explanation. 

Repairing  Houses.  - Do  not  commence  repairs  on  Tuesdays.  Friday  at  a 
moment  when  Lagna  is  Taurus  or  Libra  and  Monday  when  Cancer  is 
rising  are  very  suitable  for  beginning  repairs.  The  Lagna  must  be 
occupied  by  a benefic  and  the  Moon  should  be  in  an  aquatic  sign. 
Monday,  Wednesday  and  Thursday  are  the  best. 

Walls  can  be  whitewashed  on  Monday,  Wednesday.  Thursday  and 
Friday.  As  usual,  inauspicious  lunar  days  and  fiery,  constellations 
should  be  avoided. 

No  repairs  should  be  started  under  the  constellations  of  Krittika,  Makha. 
Pushyami,  Pubba,  Hasta,  Moola  and  Revati  when  Mars  is  transiting 
these  constellations. 

The  most  ideal  combination  either  for  laying  the  foundation  or  for 
entering  houses  or  for  buying  and  selling  property  is  a Thursday 
identical  with  the  presence  of  Jupiter  in  the  following  constellations: 

Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Aslesha,  Uttara,  Poorvashadha,  Uttarashadha, 
Sravana  and  Uttarabhadra. 

Dismantling  Buildings.  - When  you  want  to  pull  down  a house,  see  that  it 
is  done  on  a day  ruled  by  a fiery  constellation  preferably  when  the  rising 
sign  is  movable.  Then  the  Moon  should  be  waning.  Mars  should  be  in 
an  Upachaya.  Avoid  Thursdays,  and  the  8th,  9th  and  30th  lunar  days. 

Removing  to  Another  House.  - This  can  be  done  when  the  usual 
Tarabala  and  Chandrabala  are  present,  one's  birth  constellation  would 


be  propitious.  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are 
favourable.  Saturday,  Sunday  and  Tuesday  should  be  rejected  as  also 
Riktha  tithis  or  negative  lunar  days.  If  the  house  is  taken  for  a purpose 
other  than  residential,  then  strengthen  the  Bhava  or  house  denoting  the 
purpose.  Thus  if  the  house  is  taken  for  investment  purposes,  see  that 
the  1 1th  house  is  strongly  disposed.  In  any  case  an  auspicious  lunar 
day,  a favourable  constellation  and  a good  weekday  are  very  necessary 
so  that  the  object  in  view  may  be  gained. 

CHAPTER  XIII 
Agriculture  and  Farming 

The  influence  of  planets  on  vegetation  is  an  admitted  fact.  Frequent 
references  appear  in  the  writings  of  ancients  and  their  knowledge 
gathered  from  observation  and  intuition  is  of  inestimable  value-to  us.  It 
may  be,  the  ancients  realised  that  all  manifestations  of  energy  on  earth 
of  which  we  have  knowledge  are  but  the  emanations  ot  the  cosmic  rays. 
In  fact  according  to  Georges  Lakhovsky  "the  concentration  of  matter 
and  the  appearance  of  life,  both  animate  and  inanimate,  are  but 
manifestation  of  these  rays".  Evidently  the  electro-magnetic  forces 
radiated  by  tire  different  planetary  and  stellar  bodies  have  an  intimate 
bearing  on  the  origin  and  development  of  vegetable  life.  Solomon  wrote: 
"There  is  a time  to  plant  and  a time  to  pluck  up  that  which  is  planted;  a 
time  to  kill  and  a time  to  heal".  This  is  a sound  astrological  maxim. 

Minerals,  vegetables  and  animals  form  the  worldly  phenomena  and  this 
is  admitted  even  by  the  most  orthodox  scientist.  The  interdependence  of 
these  three  upon  one  another  is  too  well  known  to  need  any  elaboration. 
Behind  these  three  grand  kingdoms  of  nature,  are  the  agencies  sent  out 
by  the  solar  globe.  Under  the  solar  agencies  of  sunlight,  heat,  sound, 
magnetism,  electricity  and  other  invisible  agencies  which  are  not  yet 
discovered  by  the  modern  scientist  but  which  were  known  to  the  ancient 
Maharishis,  minerals  grow,  expand  and  crumble  down.  In  their  various 
states  these  minerals  help  the  construction,  growth,  expansion  and 
destruction  of  vegetables.  Life  pervades  throughout  the  whole  universe 
in  some  form  or  other,  and  all  phenomena  have  life  in  them.  Life  as  we 
conceive  in  men  may  be  different  from  that  found  among  the 
numberless  animals,  and  then  again  among  the  countless  varieties  in 
the  vegetable  kingdom.  Vegetables  are  produced  by  the  minerals.  Life 
functions  are  exhibited  by  all  vegetation  and  every  student  of  botany 
knows  perfectly  well  that  similarities  exist  between  vegetable  and  animal 


functions-physiological,  embryological,  etc.  Pushing  on  our  natural  law 
and  analogy  further  the  life  having  vegetables  cannot  be  the  products  of 
Lifeless  minerals.  If  evolution  is  a principle  and  theory  recognised  by 
experience  then  the  life  in  the  minerals  will  be  in  a particular  stage,  and 
with  its  environments  and  working  under  the  great  solar  agencies  of 
light,  heat,  sound,  etc.,  it  develops  itself  into  a stage  where  it  will  be 
fitted  to  enter  into  the  higher  forms  of  existence  among  the  various 
species  of  vegetables.  Among  the  Ayurvedic  texts,  all  the  metals  are 
said  to  have  life  and  in  converting  them  into  powders  (Bhasmas)  there 
are  great  santhis  or  remedies  prescribed  which  are  considered  to  be 
effective  in  removing  the  sin  which  a doctor  gets  by  killing  and  burning  a 
Loha  or  metal.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  minerals  beget  vegetables  and  both 
are  the  product  of  solar  energies  manifesting  themselves  in  a particular 
form.  Spectrum  analysis  of  light  reveals  that  ultra-violet  and  infra-red 
rays  mark  the  two  ends  of  the  spectral  band.  If  a particular  culture  of 
bacteria  is  brought  near  the  spectrum  band,  then  such  bacteria  are 
found  to  collect  near  the  red  rays  suggesting  that  the  bacteria  have  a 
greater  affinity  towards  the  red  rays.  Similarly  each  kind  of  vegetable 
has  an  attraction  for  a particular  type  of  planetary  rays. 

There  is  a direct  and  tangible  connection  between  the  planets  and  the 
vegetables.  Constellations  are  bundles  of  electro-magnetic  forces  and 
their  influences  on  crops  are  an  admitted  fact.  Crops  of  various 
descriptions  should  be  sown  and  reaped  in  certain  constellations. 

Cato  (234-149  B.C.)  gives  us  full  assurance  that  "timber  is  felled  most 
advantageously  when  the  Moon  is  in  conjuction  with  the  Sun"  and  that 
"fig,  apple,  olive,  and  pen  trees,  as  well  as  vines,  should  be  planted  in 
the  dark  of  the  Moon  in  the  afternoon  when  there  is  no  south  wind 
blowing". 

Plutarch  (46-120  A.D.),  in  his  commentary  on  Hesiod,  asserts  that  the 
onion  plant  grows  green  and  throws  forth  shoots  during  the  waning 
Moon  and  dries  up  when  the  Moon  is  increasing. 

The  famous  French  Astronomer  Camille  Flammarion  (1842-1925) 
testifies  as  follows:  "Cucumbers  increase  at  Full  Moon,  as  well  as 
radishes,  turnips,  leeks,  lilies,  horse  radish,  saffron".  Herbs  gathered 
while  the  Moon  increases  are  of  great  efficacy.  Varahamihira,  the  great 
astronomer  and  astrologer  of  the  1st  century  B.C.,  has  made  a very 
good  study  of  vegetable  astrology,  and  his  observations  deserve  our 
careful  attention. 


Before  dealing  with  the  various  Muhurthas  for  sowing  seeds,  grafting, 
planting,  etc.,  I may  casually  refer  to  certain  combinations  of  planets 
which  denote,  in  ft  general  manner,  the  nature  of  the  different  crops  in 
the  comming  seasons. 

If  at  the  time  when  the  Sun  enters  Scorpio,  benefic  planets  should 
occupy  the  said  sign,  or  the  4th,  7th  or  10th  from  it,  the  Greeshma  or 
summer  crops  will  thrive  well.  The  same  result  may  be  predicted,  if 
Jupiter  is  in  Aquarius  and  the  Moon  is  in  Leo.  Summer  crops  will  be 
good  if  at  the  time  of  Sun's  entry  into  Scorpio,  Venus  or  Mercury  or  both 
should  occupy  either  Dhanus  or  Thula.  If  there  are  malefic  planets  on 
both  sides  crops  will  be  injured.  If  a malefic  occupies  the  7th  house  at 
the  time  of  Sun's  entry  into  Scorpio,  crops  will  suffer  blight.  If  such  7th 
house  is  aspected  by  benches,  crops  will  no  doubt  be  injured  but  they 
will  not  be  totally  destroyed. 

Crops  which  grow  in  autumn  will  strive  well  or  will  be  destroyed 
according  as  the  planetary  dispositions  are  good  or  bad  at  the  time  of 
Sun's  entry  into  Taurus. 

Buying  Land  for  Agriculture.  - Monday,  Wednesday  and  Saturday  are 
good.  Let  the  Moon  be  waxing  and  Mars  be  in  the  4th  house.  As  usual, 
avoid  the  Riktha  tithis.  The  best  asterisms  are:  Aswini,  Rohini, 

Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Pushyami,  Uttara,  Sravana,  Satabhisha, 
Uttarabhadra,  Vishitikarana  may  also  be  avoided.  If  due  to  any 
unavoidable  circumstances,  it  is  not  possible  to  be  present  at  the  land  to 
gain  possession  at  the  auspicious  moment  selected,  then  pick  up  and 
carry  away  a handful  of  earth,  from  that  land  when  Cancer  is  rising  and 
the  last  pada  of  Bharani,  Aridra  or  Visakha  is  ruling. 

Ploughing  the  Land.  - The  soil  should  be  tilled  on  days  ruled  by  benefic 
planets.  Generally,  the  sign  Leo,  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the 
constellation  governed  by  him  is  favourable.  The  benefic  stars  are 
Rohini,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Anuradha,  Moola, 
Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra. 

All  lunar  days  except  the  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th  and  10th  and  New  Moon  days 
are  good.  At  the  time  of  ploughing,  let  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer, 

Capricorn  or  Pisces  be  rising.  Avoid  Scorpio  and  Aquarius,  if  the  rising 
sign  is  Mesha,  it  proves  fatal  to  the  cattle;  if  it  is  Scorpio,  then  crops  will 
be  destroyed  by  fire.  If  Aquarius,  there  is  fear  from  thieves.  See  that  the 
Lagna  is  free  from  malefic  association.  It  is  better  that  the  bright  half  of 


the  lunar  month  is  selected. 


On  the  first  day  start  ploughing  eastward  or  northward. 

Sowing  and  Planting.  - Any  seeds  can  be  sown  on  a day  ruled  by  Hasta, 
Chitta,  Swati,  Makha,  Pushyami,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra, 
Rohini,  Revati,  Aswini,  Moola  or  Anuradha  provided  the  lunar  day  is 
also  propitious.  Choose  a Lagna,  owned  by  the  planet  who  is  lord  of  the 
weekday  in  question.  Beets  and  carrots  may  be  sown  when  the  Moon  is 
in  Sagittarius.  Potatoes  and  other  underground  vegetables  should  be 
sown  when  the  rising  sign  is  an  aquatic  one.  On  Thursdays  fruit  trees 
may  be  planted  when  Sagittarius  and  Pisces  are  rising.  Flower  seeds 
and  cuttings  may  be  sown  in  Taurus  and  Libra.  Ragi,  gingelli  and  all 
grains  of  black  colour  may  be  advantageously  sown  in  Capricorn  and 
Aquarius. 

Always  choose  a Lagna  owned  by  the  planet  who  is  lord  of  the  weekday 
in  question.  Tomato  maybe  planted  while  the  Moon  is  waxing  and  is  in 
the  sign  of  Cancer.  Capricorn  rising  is  not  favourable.  For  the  best 
results  the  Moon  should  be  waxing  and  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of 
planting  should  be  Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces.  Generally  speaking, 
seeds  planted  while  the  Lagna  is  Cancer  tend  towards  abundance  and 
fruitfulness.  When  the  Lagna  is  Thula  the  yield  will  be  smaller  and  the 
tendency  is  toward  larger  size  in  both  fruit  and  flower.  Aries:  Garlic  may 
be  planted  with  success.  Taurus:  Peach,  plum,  potatoes,  radishes, 
onion  sets  and  turnips.  Gemini:  Not  favourable  for  any  planting  being  a 
barren  sign.  Cancer:  Beans,  cabbage,  corn,  cucumber,  lettuce,  melons, 
pumpkins,  tomatoes,  cauliflower,  water-melons,  and  cereals.  Leo:  Not 
good  for  any  planting,  especially  bad  for  underground  plants  such  as 
potato.  Virgo:  Flowering  plants.  Libra:  Wheat,  rye,  barley,  rice  and  other 
field  crops.  Scorpio:  Garlic  and  onion  seeds.  Sagittarius:  Pepper  and 
other  spring  crops  and  garlic.  Capricorn:  Potato,  radishes  and  turnips. 
Aquarius:  All  black  cereals  and  grains.  Pisces:  Cucumbers,  pumpkins, 
radishes,  water-melons  and  carrots. 

All  odd  lunar  days  except  the  9th  are  good.  All  even  tithis  except  the 
2nd  and  4th  should  be  avoided. 

Seeds  of  flower  plants,  and  fruit-bearing  creepers  should  be  sown  in  the 
asterisms  of  Mriyusira,  Punarvasu,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Swati,  Anuradha  and 
Revati.  Solarium  indicum  grows  under  Bharani.  Aswini  is  favourable  for 
betal-nuts.  Rohini  is  good  for  trees.  Sugarcane  grows  welt  under 


Punarvasu.  All  varieties  of  grain  thrive  well  under  Pushya;  Swati  and 
Sravana  favour  paddy.  Anuradha  rules  sesamum;  Moola  is  favourable 
for  creepers  and  roots  and  black  grain  crops  thrive  well  under 
Satabhisha. 

Seedlings  of  coconuts  may  be  planted  in  Aquarius.  The  following  extract 
is  from  an  ancient  work  on  Muhurtha: 

"Paddy  should  be  sown  on  Sunday  when  the  Sun  is  in  Lagna;  seeds  of 
flower  plants  (aquatic)  should  be  sown  on  Thursday  when  Jupiter  is  in 
Lagna.  Seedlings  of  flower  sown  on  Tuesday  when  Mars  is  in  Lagna; 
Palmyra  seedlings  should  be  planted  on  Wednesday  when  Mercury  is  in 
Lagna.  Seedlings  of  long-lived  fruit  trees  should  be  planted  on  Thursday 
when  Jupiter  is  in  Lagna.  Seedlings  of  flower  trees  should  be  planted  on 
Friday  when  Venus  is  in  Lagna.  Seeds  of  black  grains  should  be  sown 
on  Saturday  noon  when  Saturn  is  in  Lagna.  While  beginning  all 
agricultural  operations,  see  that  the  8th  house  is  unoccupied". 

Grafting  and  Pruning.  - Saturn  should  be  favourably  placed  preferably  in 
the  6th  or  1 1th  house.  Strengthen  the  Lagna  by  placing  a benefic  in  a 
kendra  and  by  rendering  the  8th  house  vacant.  Avoid  Tuesdays  and 
Riktha  tithis.  In  all  agricultural  operations,  the  position  of  the  Moon  is 
very  important.  See  - hat  the  Moon  is  strong  and  free  from  affliction  by 
Rahu,  Ketu  or  Saturn.  The  Moon  should  be  a benefic. 

Felling  Trees.  - Trees  should  be  cut  when  the  Moon  is  in  the  last  quarter 
so  that  the  wood  may  be  strong,  massive  and  durable.  The  Lagna  must 
be  a dry  sign  aspected  preferably  by  a dry  planet. 

Reaping  the  Crop.  - Bharani,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Aridra,  Pushyami, 
Makha,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Visakha,  Anuradha,  Uttarashadha  and  Sravana 
are  favourable  constellations  to  start  reaping  the  crop.  Avoid  4th,  8th, 
9th,  1 1th,  12th  and  14th  lunar  days  as  also  the  New  Moon.  Taurus, 
Gemini,  Virgo,  Libra,  Sagittarius  or  Pisces  should  be  rising. 

Harvesting.  - This  can  be  commenced  in  Pisces  Lagna  on  a day  ruled 
by  Bharani;  Scorpio  on  a day  ruled  by  Sravana;  Cancer  under  Visakha. 
These  pairs  form  special  combinations  and  promote  prosperity. 

In-Gathering  of  Corn.  - After  the  harvest  is  over,  the  produce  has  to  be 
gathered  in.  This  can  be  advantageously  done  under  the  constellations 
of  Bharani,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Pubba,  Aridra,  Punarvasu,  Pushya, 


Makha,  Uttdra,  Hasta,  Swati,  Anuradha,  Moola,  Sravana  and  Revati. 

Saturn  may  be  located  in  the  4th  house.  All  lunar  days  except  the  4th, 
6th,  8th,  9th,  12th,  14th  and  New  Moon  are  auspicious.  Monday, 
Thursday,  Friday  and  Saturday  are  good.  The  Amsas  of  Moon,  Jupiter, 
Venus,  and  Saturn  are  also  auspicious.  Tuesdays  and  Sundays  should 
be  avoided.  Movable  signs  must  be  rejected  as  they  tend  to  destroy  the 
grain  by  pests  or  decomposing. 

Taurus  rising  on  days  ruled  by  Makha  and  Uttara  respectively  in  the 
lunar  months  of  Magha  and  Phalguna  goes  under  the  distinction  of 
Dhanya  Parvatha  Yoga.  Grain  collected  under  this  combination  is 
supposed  to  confer  happiness  and  prosperity  to  the  person  concerned. 

Buying  or  Selling  Cows.  - Buying  6r  selling  of  cows  or  cattle  can  be 
done  under  the  constellations  of  Aswini,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Hasta, 
Swati,  Visakha,  Jyeshta  and  Revati.  Let  preferably  Taurus  be  rising. 
Avoid  Mars  in  the  8th  house. 

Buying  or  Selling  Horses.  - Let  the  Moon  and  the  lord  of  Lagna  be 
friendly.  Avoid  their  Dwirdwadasa  rotations.  It  is  better  that  the 
transaction  is  done  when  Sagittarius  is  rising.  Let  the  lagna  be  an  airy 
sign  if  you  wish  to  buy  a race  horse. 

Buying  Sheep.  - Let  the  Lagna  be  Aries.  Avoid  Saturn  in  the  8th  house. 
Let  Aries  or  Capricorn  be  rising  at  the  time  of  the  transaction. 

The  Lagna  and  the  6th  house  should  be  strong  when  buying  dogs  or 
hounds.  Birds  should  be  purchased  when  the  Lagna  is  an  airy  sign. 

Any  animal  may  be  purchased  on  a Thursday  ruled  by  Pushya  When 
the  Lagna  is  Aries.  No  animal  should  be  sold  on  days  ruled  by  Krittika, 
Aridra,  Makha,  Aslesha,  Swati  and  Anuradha. 

Intelligent,  use  of  knowledge  concerning  planting,  harvesting,  breeding, 
etc.,  will  bring  satisfactory  results.  Disregard  of  these  astrological 
principles  is  no  excuse  for  failure. 

CHAPTER  XIV 
T ravel 

Human  nature  varies  from  the  highest  genius  to  the  greatest  ignorance. 


Phenomena  occur  in  nature  whether  we  notice  them  or  not.  Dr.  Johnson 
is  said  to  have  observed:  "Let  observation  with  extensive  view  survey 
mankind  from  China  to  Peru"  Observing,  reflective  and  thoughtful  minds 
notice  various  phenomena,  in  their  daily  transactions  of  life  which 
apparently  seem  to  have  no  immediate  connection  with  the  failures  and 
successes  they  meet  with.  But  when  carefully  analysed  it  will  be  found 
that  there  is  some  sort  of  correlation  between  certain  invisible  agencies 
and  events  on  the  earth.  But  the  true  causes  are  intelligible  to  the 
ordinary  minds.  Suppose  a man  starts  on  an  errand  at  an  inauspicious 
time  and  fails  in  his  mission,  the  planets  are  not  to  blame.  They  are  only 
an  index  of  events  to  happen.  They  merely  reveal  that  influences 
operating  when  the  man  started  on  his  mission  were  such  as  to  give  rise 
to  failure.  That  the  influence  of  time  is  not  even  or  uniform  needs  no 
great  explanation. 

It  must  be  within  the  experience  of  an  intelligent  man  that  solar  heat  and 
light  differ  at  different  times  due  to  motion  of  the  Sun.  This  is 
demonstrable  to  the  ordinary  senses.  But  there  are  invisible  influences 
and  agenices  which  can  only  be  grasped  by  higher  orders  of 
intelligence.  The  ancient  sages  had  been  able  to  recognise  these 
influences  and  how  journeys  undertaken  at  different  times  of  year, 
month  and  day,  would  produce  different  kinds  of  results. 

In  the  modern  times,  travel  facilities  have  no  doubt  been  perfected;  and 
so  far  as  human  conceptions  go,  the  traveller  is  provided  with  every 
possible  facility.  But  because  the  rules  of  astrology  are  ignored,  there 
have  been  serious  accidents  and  appaling  loss  of  life.  Man  is 
incessantly  subject  to  the  bombardment  of  different  kinds  of  forces 
emanating  from  planets  and  the  interstellar  spaces.  The  nature  of  the 
force  operating  at  any  given  moment  depends  upon  the  nature  of  the 
disposition  of  the  different  planets  at  the  moment  concerned.  Hence  it 
can  safely  be  pointed  out  that  a journey  undertaken  at  a propitious 
moment  would  enable  the  person  to  consummate  the  object  in  view  and 
get  back  safely  to  his  home.  Instance  of  loss  of  life,  loss  of  money,  and 
distress  and  disappointments  to  the  traveller,  because  the  journey  was 
undertaken  when  the  planetary  vibrations  were  inharmonious,  can  be 
cited  ad  infinitum. 

A man  wants  to  go  to  a foreign  country  on  urgent  business.  Here  he 
must  have  financial  success,  good  health,  and  a safe  trip.  We  shall 
grant  for  argument's  sake  that  at  the  time  of  starting,  he  is  hale  and 
healthy,  has  plenty  of  money  and  the  travel  agents  have  arranged  for 


him  the  best  conveyance.  Naturally  he  may  laugh  at  the  idea  that  he 
should  ever  consult  a good  time  for  beginning  his  trip,  when  everything 
else  is  so  very  satisfactory. 

The  poor  man  must  remember  that  the  world's  phenomena,  physical 
and  mental,  are  correlated  and  that  the  links  between  apparently  two 
different  and  widely  separated  events,  though  invisible,  are  still  present 
in  the  bargain  and  one  who  overlooks  the  currents  of  luck  really  omits 
important  factors  which  may  do  him  immense  harm  when  he  is  least 
prepared  to  meet  it.  The  laws  of  Nature,  some  visible  and  many 
invisible,  are  not  controlled  by  the  latest  inventions  or  discoveries  in  the 
physical  plane  alone.  The  late  Mr.  Stead  and  3000  men  sailed  on  a ship 
that  was  constructed  on  the  best  scientific  principles  but  an  iceberg 
destroyed  this  Titanica  with  all  the  unlucky  passengers  in  an  hour  or 
two.  Lord  Kitchner  and  his  600  officers  were  embarked  on  a splendid 
Man  of  War  but  at  an  unlucky  hour  and  the  whole  crew  were  drowned 
within  five  minutes.  We  read  in  the  daily  press  about  the  frequent 
occurrence  of  aerial,  railway  and  automobile  accidents  resulting  in  the 
deaths  of  hundreds  of  innocent  men,  women  and  children.  Many 
accidents  can  be  prevented  if  due  attention  is  paid  to  the  time -factor. 

The  most  enlightened  nations  and  persons  have  suffered  the  greatest 
calamities  by  sheer  pride  and  prejudice  and  neglect  of  knowledge 
recorded  by  the  intellectual  gaints  of  past  generations. 

The  ancients  seem  to  have  made  a careful  study  of  the  subject  of  travel 
for  various  purposes  and  have  framed  sound  astrological  rules  for  the 
guidance  of  humanity.  There  is  a vast  literature  extant  on  this  subject. 

As  usual,  there  has  also  been  some  difference  of  opinion  between  some 
of  the  standard  texts.  I have  avoided  all  that  is  superficial  and  have 
confined  myself  to  an  elucidation  of  just  the  essential  astrological 
principles  governing  travel  or  yatra. 

Journeys.  - The  best  lunar  days  are  the  2nd,  3rd,  5th,  7th,  10th,  1 1th 
and  13th.  The  14th  lunar  day  and  Full  and  New  Moon  days  should  be 
avoided  at  any  cost. 

If  a journey  is  undertaken  in  the  following  constellations,  the  person  is 
supposed  to  return  back  early  after  satisfactorily  completing  his  work: 
Mrigasira,  Aswini,  Pushya,  Punarvasu,  Hasta,  Anuradha,  Sravana, 
Moola,  Dhanishta  and  Revati.  It  is  better  that  the  journey  is  commenced 
in  the  2nd,  3rd  or  last  quarter  of  the  constellation.  The  first  quarter  may 
be  avoided  as  far  as  possible. 


No  journey  should  be  undertaken  on  days  ruled  by  Krittika,  Bharani. 
Aslesha.  Visakha,  Pubba,  Poorvabhadra  and  Aridra.  Of  these,  the 
following  nakshatras  may  be  deemed  fit  for  travelling  beyond  the 
spheres  of  evil  influence:  - Krittika  - 13  ghatis;  Bharani  - 7;  Makha  - 14; 
Pubba,  Poorvashadha  and  Poorvabhadra  - 16;  Swati,  Aslesha  and 
Visakha  - 14.  In  our  humble  experience,  it  is  found  that  Bharani  and 
Krittika  should  always  be  avoided  while  the  other  stars  given  in  this 
paragraph,  journeys  can  be  undertaken  in. 

We  have  to  emphasise  that  Bharani  and  Krittika  should  be  invariably 
rejected. 

Do  not  travel  towards  the  East  on  Saturday  and  Monday;  towards  South 
on  Thursday;  towards  West  on  Sunday  and  Friday  and  towards  North 
on  Wednesday  and  Tuesday.  Provided  the  journey  is  timed  to  begin 
beyond  22  ghatis  on  Thursday,  12  ghatis  on  Tuesday  and  Wednesday; 
15  ghatis  on  Friday  and  Sunday,  8 ghatis  on  Saturday  and  Monday,  the 
above  restriction  does  not  hold  good.  In  our  view,  Tuesday  must 
preferably  be  avoided. 

Aries,  Taurus,  Cancer,  Leo,  Libra  and  Sagittarius  are  favourable  signs 
for  starting  on  a journey. 

Rising  sign  at  the  time  of  journey  being  one's  Janma  Rasi  is  highly 
favoured.  But  it  should  never  be  the  sign  of  one's  Janma  Lagna. 

Journey  should  not  also  be  undertaken  when  the  Lagna  is  the  5th,  7th 
or  the  9th  from  one's  Janma  Lagna. 

Let  Jupiter  or  Venus  be  well  placed  in  Lagna  at  the  time  of  starting.  This 
makes  the  journey  successful. 

Ancient  texts  contain  several  other  rules  prohibiting  journeys  towards 
different  directions  when  different  constellations  rule.  There  is  then  the 
question, of  Yogini.  Chandra  Garbha,  Yatraphani  Chakra,  etc.,  a 
consideration  of  all  of  which  would  only  lead  to  confusion.  It  is  indeed 
very  difficult  to  select  a day  thoroughly  favourable  in  respect  of  all 
factors. 

Therefore,  readers  would  do  well  to  restrict  the  choice  of  a day  to 
considerations  already  set  forth  above.  It  must  be  noted  that  strict 
adherence  to  the  astrological  rules  is  impossible  at  times  of  emergency. 
Supposing  a friend  or  relative  is  seriously  ill  and  he  is  to  be  visited. 


There  is  no  question  of  finding  an  auspicious  date  and  time.  The  best 
thing  to  do  is  to  begin  the  journey  at  the  most  auspicious  hora  of  the 
day.  If  one  is  to  go  on  a pilgrimage  or  on  a pleasure  trip  or  on  business, 
arrangements  for  Which  could  be  made  in  advance,  a day  conforming  to 
all  astrological  considerations  should  be  fixed.  The  most  essential 
factors  to  be  remembered  in  selecting  a suitable  day  for  travel  are  (a)  a 
good  lunar  day,  (b)  a favourable  constellation,  (c)  a well-fortified  Lagna 
and  (d)  the  absence  of  Panchaka  Dosha.  If  these  are  properly 
observed,  that  means  alt  astrological  precautions  will  have  been  taken. 

The  following  general  combinations  would  be  of  utmost  importance  to 
the  average  person:  - 

(1 ) let  the  Moon  be  strong  and  dignified  at  the  time  of  starting. 

(2)  Avoid  days  of  vernal  and  autumnal  equinox  and  the  days  on  which 
the  Sun  enters  a new  sign  every  month. 

(3)  The  Moon  should  be  in  the  3rd,  6th,  9th  or  12th  and  Jupiter  in  a 
kendrafrom  Lagna. 

(4)  Start  when  the  Moon  is  in  Lagna  fortified  by  the  disposition  of  Jupiter 
or  Venus  in  a kendra. 

(5)  Jupiter  strong  in  Lagna  and  the  Moon  in  any  place  other  than  the  8th 
would  be  a strong  combination. 

(6)  The  journey  will  be  easy  and  peaceful  if  the  Moon  be  in  the  7th  and 
Venus  and  Mercury  be  in  the  4th. 

(7)  Mercury  in  the  4th,  Jupiter  in  the  2nd  or  7th  will  neutralise  all  the 
other  adverse  influences. 

(8)  Benefics  dignified  in  kendras  of  trikonas  act  as  powerful  antidotes  for 
all  evils. 

(9)  Jupiter  in  Lagna,  malefics  in  Upachayas  and  Venus  in  any  house 
other  than  the  7th  would  be  an  ideal  combinations. 

Short  Journeys.  - Render  the  Lagna  and  the  Moon  strong.  If  these  two 
conditions  cannot  be  fulfilled,  start  in  the  hora  of  the  strongest  planet 
keeping  in  view  the  Tarabala  and  Chandrabala  factors. 


Long-distance  Journeys.  - All  the  rules  given  in  the  earlier  pages  of  this 
chapter  are  to  be  observed.  Let  the  Moon  be  increasing  and  in  a 
favourable  situation  so  that  there  might  be  no  delay  or  hindrance.  Pay 
special  attention  to  the  eighth  house  and  see  that  Mars  is  not  there. 
Choose  a day  and  time  in  which  the  Yatra  Lagna  agrees  with  the  Janma 
Rasi.  Avoid  malefics  in  the  7th.  If  the  journey  is  by  car  or  train,  avoid 
affliction  to  Lagna  and  the  8th  lord  by  Mars  and  Rahu.  If  the  Lagna  is 
afflicted  by  Mars,  there  will  be  danger  of  accidents;  if  by  Rahu,  there  will 
be  disappointment  and  disease. 

Pilgrimage.  - Follow  the  rules  in  the  earlier  pages  of  this  chapter.  Let 
Jupiter  be  in  Lagna  or  the  9th  house.  Avoid  the  months  when  Jupiter  is 
combust. 

Air  Journeys.  - Take  due  note  of  Tarabala.  Let  the  Lagna  be  an  aerial 
sign.  Avoid  Mars  in  Lagna,  the  7th  and  the  8th.  Let  the  Moon  be  waxing 
and  as  far  away  from  Rahu  as  possible.  Render  the  ascendant  strong 
by  a suitable  disposition  of  Jupiter. 

Sea  Voyage.  - Pay  special  attention  to  watery  signs.  Let  preferably 
Cancer  be  the  Lagna  occupied  by  a watery  planet.  As  usual,  avoid  Mars 
in  Lagna,  the  7th  or  8th  house.  Venus  should  be  favourably  placed. 

Business  Journeys.  - If  you  are  to  meet  an  influential  person,  let  the 
rising  sign  fall  in  the  10th  house  in  birth  chart.  Avoid  malefics  in  Lagna 
and  the  9th.  Mercury  is  the  planet  of  trade  and  business.  He  should 
therefore  be  either  in  Lagna  or  in  the  10th  or  1 1th  but  he  should  not  be 
aspected  by  a malefic  especially  Saturn.  Mercury  in  retrograde  is  also 
favourable  as  he  will  hasten  the  transaction  to  your  satisfaction. 
Prosperity  and  success  follow  the  Moon  in  good  aspect  to  Mercury.  If 
the  Moon  is  in  8th  or  12th  house,  the  person  falls  ill  on  the  way.  Hence 
see  that  the  Moon  is  in  favourable  position.  See  also  that  the  2nd  lord  is 
not  afflicted  and  that  he  is  favourably  situated.  In  all  these  cases,  mutual 
aspects  between  Mars,  Saturn  and  Rahu  should  be  invariably  avoided 
as  they  indicate  hitches  and  insurmountable  obstacles. 

CHAPTER  XV 
Medical  Elections 

The  influences  of  the  planets  on  human  diseases  appear  with  such 
persistence  in  the  writings  of  the  ancients  that  it  is  impossible  to  ignore 


their  testimony  in  any  orderly  survey  of  the  subject.  While  it  is  doubtless 
true  that  some  of  these  references  rest  upon  a basis  of  common 
superstition  only;  it  is  impossible  to  deny  that  many  others  appear  to  be 
founded  upon  careful  observation  and  recorded  experience. 

The  tithi  and  nakshatra,  which  are  so  important  in  Muhurtha,  are  based 
on  the  luni-solar  movements.  In  the  realm  of  astrology,  the  Moon  is  the 
sensorium,  transmitter  and  collector  of  other  planetary  influences.  In 
fact,  seasonal  changes,  climate,  electrical  storms  and  our  emotional 
behaviour  are  obviously  correlated  with  the  phases  of  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon.  Crises  in  acute  diseases  are  marked  by  the  transiting  Moon 
which  is  the  minute  hand  on  the  clock  of  destiny.  The  most  serious  crisis 
day  in  acute  diseases  is  on  the  14th  day  when  the  Moon  is  in  opposition 
to  his  place  when  the  disease  started.  When  the  Moon  occupies  certain 
positions,  he  disturbs  the  equalibrium  of  the  patient's  vitality  so  much  so 
that  medicine  administered  on  such  days  would  not  prove  efficacious. 
Hence  the  need  for  electing  a proper  time  for  undertaking  medical  and 
surgical  treatments. 

Medical  astrology  is  a vast  science  and  it  is  impossible  to  treat  in  this 
volume  all  the  available  information  on  the  subject.  Therefore  I am 
giving  such  hints  as  would  be  absolutely  necessary  in  the  daily  life  of  an 
average  person. 

Beginning  Treatment.  - If  one  is  suffering  from  a chronic  disease,  the 
treatment  should  begin  under  Aswini,  Rohini,  Mrigasira.  Punarvasu, 
Pushyami,  Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Swati, 
Anuradha,  Sravana,  Dhanishta,  Satabhisha,  and  Revati.  In  respect  of 
ordinary  complaints  such  as  fever,  biliousness,  etc.,  no  treatment  would 
be  necessary  unless  the  person  has  fallen  ill  in  Pubba,  Poorvashadha, 
Poorvabhadra,  Aslesha,  jyeshta,  Aridra  and  Swati.  Treatment  is 
absolutely  necessary  when  one  takes  to  bed-under  the  following 
combinations,  viz.:  - 

(a}  Sunday  coinciding  with  the  4th  lunar  day  ruled  by  Aridra,  Aslesha  or 
Makha. 

(b)  Tuesday  coinciding  with  the  9th  lunar  day  ruled  by  Jyeshta,  Swati,  or 
Bharani,  and 

(c)  Saturday  coinciding  with  the:  14th  lunar  day  ruled  by  Pubba, 
Poorvashadha  and.  Poorvabhadra. 


Similarly,  an  illness  that  sets  in  under  one's  Janma  Nakshatra  or  the 
3rd,  5th  and  7tb  therefrom  will  cause  much  distress. 

In  regard  to  long-standing  diseases  or  recurrent  fevers,  the  best  time  for 
taking  medicine  is  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday, 
coinciding  with  Hasta,  Aswini,  Chitta  and  Punarvasu  respectively  and 
especially  at  the  time  when  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus 
occupy  their  own  vargas  and  a moveable  Rasi  or  Amsa  is  rising.  - 

Persons  suffering  from  Typhoid  or  enteric  should  begin  treatment  on  a 
Sunday  coinciding  with  the  4th,  9th  or  14th  lunar  day  not  ruled 
respectively  by  Aridra,  Bharani  and  Visakha. 

Any  treatment  commenced  under  Ugra  yogas  are  supposed  to  prove 
successful.  Ugra  yogas  arise  when  the  3rd  (or  9th),  4th,  5th,  6th,  7th, 
9th,  10th,  12th  (or  3rd)  and  13th  lunar  days  coincide  respectively  with 
Rohini,  Uttara,  Sravana,  Mrigasira.  Revats,  Krittika,  Pushva,  Anuradha. 
Krittika  (or  Makha). 

Treatment  for  Venereal  Disease.  - Select  a time  when  Aries  or  Cancer 
is  rising  on  a New  Moon  day  ruled  by  Kshipram.  Ugram  and  Chara 
constellations. 

Treatment  for  Rheumatisms  - The  3rd,  8th  and  13th  lunar  days  are 
good.  Select  Thursday  ruled  by  Aslesha  or  Aswini. 

Treatment  for  Gonorrhoea.  - Wednesday  is  the  best.  Let  the  lunar  day 
be  the  4th,  9th  or  14th  ruled  by  Kshipra,  Ugra  or  Chara  constellations. 

Treatment  for  Leprosy.  - The  rising  sign  should  be  Kumbha,  Makara, 
Mesha,  Simha  or  Vrischika.  Place  a powerful  malefic  in  the  8th  house. 
Select  (a)  Tuesday  coinciding  with  Mrigasira,  Chitta  and  Dhanishta,  (b) 
Saturday  ruled  by  Pushya.  Anuradha  and  Uttarabhadra,  and  (c)  Sunday 
coinciding  with  Krittika,  Uttara  and  Uttarashadha.  The  lunar  day  must  be 
the  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th  or  the  14th. 

Treatment  for  Epilepsy.  - Let  the  Lagna  be  a common  sign  or  a 
moveable  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  Fixed  signs  should 
be  avoided. 

Treatment  for  Consumption.  - The  lunar  day  must  be  free  from 
Vishtikarana.  The  ruling  constellation  must  belong  to  the  Sadharana 


group  and  the  Moon  must  be  aspected  by  a retrograde  planet. 


Treatment  for  Ascites.  - Tuesday  is  the  best.  The  constellation  must  be 
Bharani,  Krittika,  Aridra,  Aslesha,  Visakha,  Makha  or  Jyeshta. 

Taking  Purgative.  - Purgatives  may  be  taken  on  the  2nd,  6th  or  12th 
lunar  day.  Any  weekday  (except  Tuesday)  may  be  chosen  provided  the 
ruling  constellation  be  Punarvasu,  Revati,  Swati  or  Aridra.  Afternoon 
must  be  avoided. 

Taking  Enemas.  - Select  either  Saturday  or  Tuesday  and  avoid  malefic 
planets  in  the  7th  and  8th  houses. 

Dental  Treatment.  - The  Ugra  yoga  above  referred  to  is  quite  suitable 
for  dental  treatment  also.  See  that  the  Moon  is  not  afflicted  and  that 
Chandrashtama  is  also  avoided. 

Taking  Infections.  - Injections  may  be  taken  on  Saturday  or  Monday. 
Aries,  Taurus.  Cancer  and  Virgo  are  auspicious.  The  8th  house  must  be 
unoccupied.  See  that  Mercury'is  free  from  affliction;  as  otherwise  the 
pain  wilt  be  severe  and  nervous  weakness  may  set  in. 

Surgical  Operations.  - When  possible,  operate  in  the  period  of  the 
intrease  of  the  Moon.  Never  operate  at  the  exact  time  of  the  Full  Moon 
as  the  bodily  fluids  are  running  highest  then.  Let  not  the  Moon  at  the 
time  of  the  operation  be  in  the  same  sign  as  at  birth.  No  Operation 
should  be  done  on  the  part  of  the  body  ruled  by  the  sign  through  which 
the  Moon  is  transiting  at  that  time  but  wait  a day  or  more  until  the  Moon 
passes  into  the  next  sign  below,  and  especially,  if  the  Moon  be  in 
conjunction,  or  evil  aspect  to  malefics  at  the  time. 

For  surgical  operations  Tuesday  or  Saturday  is  recommended.  Mars 
must  be  powerful.  The  8th  house  should  be  unoccupied.  And  the  ruling 
constellation  is  Aridra,  Jyeshta.  Aslesha  or  Moola  coinciding  with  the 
4th,  9th  or  14th  lunar  day.  It  is  very  necessary  to  strengthen  the  house 
ruling  the  part  of  the  body  to  be  operated  upon.  This  if  the  stomach  is  to 
be  operated  upon,  the  time  selected  should  be  such  as  to  render  the  5th 
house  strong  by  benefic  aspects.  Mutual  aspects  between  Mars  and 
Saturn  should  be  avoided. 

Treatment  for  the  Nose.  - The  ascendant  must  be  Cancer,  Leo  of  Virgo. 
The  Moon  must  be  free  from  affliction.  Avoid  Mars  or  for  that  matter  any 


malefic  in  the  8th.  The  Sun  should  be  unaspected  by  Saturn  or  Rahu. 

To  Prepare  Medicines.  - Preparation  of  medicines  should  be 
commenced  when  the  Lagna  is  Chara  or  Dwiswabhava.  Fixed  signs 
should  be  invariably  rejected.  The  6th,  7th  and  8th  houses  should  be 
unoccupied.  Sunday,  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  are 
good.  Auspicious  lunar  days  are  the  1st,  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th,  1 1th  and 
14th. 

Any  panacea  prepared  when  Saturn,  Mars  and  the  Sun  are  in  Lagna  or 
in  a kendra  from  Lagna.  is  said  to  become  an  effective  remedy  for  all 
diseases. 

Taking  First  Bath  after  illness.  - When  one  has  completely  recovered 
from  an  illness  of  long  duration  the  first  bath  should  be  given  on  a day 
ruled  by  Aswini,  Bharani,  Krittika,  Mrigasira,  Aridra,  Pushya.  Pubba, 
Hasta,  Chitta,  Visakha,  Moola,  Poorvashadha  and  Poorvabhadra.  There 
must  be  Tarabala  also.  Chandrashtamas  should  be  avoided.  Tuesday, 
Wednesday  and  Thursday  are  good.  The  4th,  8th,  9th,  14th  and  New 
Moon  days  should  be  avoided. 

CHAPTER  XVI 
Public  Matters 

In  this  chapter  is  included  information  on  various  matters  concerning 
public  welfare.  In  the  light  of  the  present  official  attitude  towards 
astrology,  this  chapter  cannot  be  of  much  practical  importance.  Yet  as  in 
several  public  functions  in  India  astrological  consultations  are  not 
altogether  6one  away  with  but  resorted  to  privately  it  is  hoped  that  the 
principles  given  below  would  prove  of  value  to  those  who  are  called 
upon  to  fix  up  suitable  time  for  affairs  of  momentous  importance  to  the 
public. 

The  astrological  precepts  on  public  affairs  may  be  considered  by  ill- 
informed  or  half  educated  persons  as  ridiculous.  But  one  who  is  a keen 
student  of  natural  laws  and  who  knows  the  importance  of  time  and  its 
manifestations  cannot  fail  to  notice  that  there  is  much  sense  underlying 
these  precepts,  for  we  are  only  asked  to  move  in  harmony  with  laws  of 
nature.  An  intelligent  man  must  question  himself  why,  for  instance  a 
project  launched  at  one  hour  proves  fortunate  investment,  white  another 
launched  at  a different  hour  proves  most  unluckly.  Some  ventures  are 


doomed  to  failure  from  their  very  inception  in  spite  of  all  the  apparent 
favourable,  circumstances.  Consequently  even  those  who  make  it  a 
point  to  scoff  at  astrology  cannot  help  speaking  such  as  "illstarred 
affairs"  although  unaware  of  the  meaning  of  this  expression.  Many 
nation-building  activities  have  either  proved  abortive  or  resulted  in 
failure  simply  because  they  were  started  in  an  unlucky  moment. 

Building  and  Launching  Ships.  - The  constellations  Jyeshta.  Makha, 
Visakha,  Aridra,  Rohini,  Bharani,  Knttika  and  Aslesha  should  be 
avoided.  The  remaining  ones  are  auspicious.  Sunday,  Thursday  and 
Friday  are  good.  Let  the  Lagna  be  a watery  sign.  Place  the  lord  of 
Lagna  in  the  9th  or  1 1th  house.  The  lord  of  Janma  Rasi  should  be  in  a 
watery  sign.  Avoid  movable  signs.  Let  there  be  no  planet  in  8th  house. 

In  building  ships  for  war,  strengthen  the  position  of  Mars;  In  building 
merchant  and  passenger  ships,  see  that.  Mercury  is  dignified  or  at  least 
occupies  an  Upachaya  sign  free  from  affliction.  Either  Venus  or  Jupiter 
should  be  in  a kendra  or  trikona.  The  conjunction  of  Mars  and  Moon  and 
Mars  and  Lagna  or  Lagnadhipathi  should  be  avoided. 

Building  Towns  and  Cities.  - The  foundation  stone  should  be  laid  at  an 
auspicious  moment  as  per  rules  given  in  the  chapter  on  House  Building. 
The  best  asterisms  for  laying  the  foundation  for  building  a town  are 
Aswini,  Chitta  and  Revati.  The  Lagna  must  be  a fixed  sign  powerful  ly 
aspected  by  Jupiter.  This  gives  durability  and  continuance.  Place 
Mercury  in  an  auspicious  position.  This  makes  the  city  grow  into  a big 
trading  centre.  Confine  Saturn  to  an  Upachaya.  Mars  should  have  no 
connection  with  the  Lagna.  Have  the  construction  begun  when  the 
Moon  is  increasing  in  light?  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday 
are  good.  Movable  signs  should  be  avoided.  Benefic  planets  should  be 
in  Lagna,  the  2nd  and  the  9th  houses.  Malefics  should  be  in  3rd  and 
11th  houses.  The  8th  should  be  vacant  as  also  the  12th.  But  a benefic 
in  the  12th  is  permissible. 

Building  Military  Quarters.  - The  constellation  of  Uttarabhadra  is  the  best 
for  beginning  the  construction  of  military  quarters  or  barracks. 

Dairy  Farms.  - Let  Taurus  or  Cancer  be  the  rising  sign.  Aswini, 
Punarvasu,  Pushya.  dasta,  Swati,  Sravana,  Dhanishta  and  Satabhisha 
are  the  best  Nakshatras.  The  presence  of  the  Moon  in  Lagna  augurs 
prosperity.  Monday  is  the  best  weekday. 


Electing  Head  of  the  State.  - The  best  constellations  areAswinr.  Rohini, 


Mrigasira,  Punarvasu,  Pushya.  Uttara,  Hasta,  Anuradha.  Uttarashadha, 
Sravana.  Uttarabhadra  and  Revati.  All  odd  lunar  days  (in  the  bright  half) 
except  the  9th  are  good.  The  2nd  and  10th  lunar  days  are  also 
favourable.  The  rising  sign  must  be  Aries.  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer,  Leo, 
Sagittarius,  Aquarius  or  Pisces. 

Strengthen  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  Fortify  the  Lagna  and  the  10th  and 
their  lords.  Let  the  8th  house  be  vacant.  Confine  malefics  to  Upachayas. 
If  possible,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  should  be  placed  in  Cancer  or  Leo 
preferably  subject  to  the  aspect  of  Jupiter.  As  usual,  the  Tarabala, 
Chandrabala,  Panchaka,  etc.,  should  be  carefully  looked  into. 

Coronation.  - The  foregoing  rules  apply  to  coronation  also.  If  possible, 
let  Lagna  be  Leo  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  aspected  by  Jupiter.  In  case 
of  democratic  rule,  the  new  Government  may  begin  at  a time  when 
Kumbha  is  rising  with  Saturn  in  Lagna  or  in  Thula  aspected  in  either 
case  by  Jupiter  or  Venus. 

Installing  a Deiiy.  - Building  temples  and  installing  deities  involve  the 
consideration  of  very  important  astrological  principles  which  an  average 
student  of  astrology  will  be  unable  to  understand  thoroughly.  Therefore, 
selection  of  an  auspicious  moment  for  such  purposes  may  well  be  left  to 
a specialist.  There  are  complicated  astronomical,  astrological  and 
religious  rules  given  in  original  Works  and  the  reader  Will  do  well  to 
refer  to  such  works  as  Brihat  Samhits,  Kalamrita.  etc.,  for  greater 
details.  Here  I shall  give  just  a few  salient  principles. 

The  installation  of  a deity  should  be  done  when  the  Sun  is  in  the 
Northern  course.  The  lunar  month  of  Magha  should  be  avoided. 
According  to  Kalaprakasika,  the  ceremony  is  to  be  done  when  Jupiter 
and  Venus  are  dignified  and  devoid  of  adverse  influences. 

Rohini,  Mrigasira.  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Swati, 
Uttarashadha  and  Uttarabhadra  are  good  constellations  for  this 
purpose.  All  odd  lunar  days  (except  the  9th)  including  the  2nd,  6th  and 
10th  are  favourable.  The  Lagna  must  be  a fixed  sign.  A common  sign 
may  be  selected  for  a female  Deity.  Movable  signs  should  always  be 
rejected.  The  Lagna  should  not  be  conjoined  by  the  luminaries  or 
malefics  or  otherwise  the  town  concerned  will  be  destroyed.  No  malefic 
should  occupy  the  7th.  There  should  be  no  planet  in  the  8th.  The 
ceremony  should  be  avoided  at  the  end  of  an  Ayana,  the  end  of  a year, 
of  a lunar  day  and  of  an  asterism;  and  on  days  on  which  halos  round  the 


Sun  and  the  Moon  are  visible. 


CHAPTER  XVII 
Miscellaneous  Elections 

In  the  foregoing  chapters  elections  bearing  upon  almost  all  human 
activities  have  been  clearly  described.  In  this  chapter  I propose  to  deal 
with  a few  more  important  ones  bearing  upon  sports,  law-suits, 
prisoners  and  war. 

Lotteries  and  Competitions.  - Success  in  lotteries  and  competitions 
generally  depends  upon  the  strength  of  the  birth  horoscope  in  regard  to 
the  house  of  finance  and  the  nature  of  the  directional  influences  at  the 
time  concerned.  Therefore,  much  reliance  cannot  be  placed  on  the 
strength  of  election  in.  regard  to  chance -games. 

Aswini,  Bharani,  Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Visakha, 
Poorvashadha  and  Revati  are  excellent  for  entering  into  competitions. 
The  2nd,  3rd,  5th,  6th,  1 1th  and  13th  lunar  days  are  good.  All  weekdays 
are  suitable  except  Tuesday  and  Saturday.  Let  the  Lagna  belong  to  a 
benefic  planet.  Fortify  the  Moon  and  the  5th  and  the  9th  houses.  Avoid 
the  1 1th  lord  in  the  12th  and  Mars  in  the  8th.  Saturn  should  cast  no 
aspect  either  on  the  2nd  house  or  on  the  2nd  lord. 

Horse  Races.  - Here  again  the  birth  chart  is  important.  Horses  are  said 
to  be  governed  by  Aswini.  This  constellation  therefore  is  fortunate  for 
purchasing  and  training  horse  for  race  purposes.  Krittika,  Mrigasira, 
Punarvasu,  Pushya,  Uttarabhadra,  Hasta,  Swati,  Visakha,  Anuradha 
and  Dhanishta  are  also  good.  Monday,  Wednesday,  Thursday  and 
Friday  are  favourable.  If  you  want  to  run  a horse  for  a race,  place 
Sagittarius  in  Lagna  and  strengthen  the  10th  house. 

Filing  Law-suits.  - Avoid  the  usual  unfavourable  lunar  days.  Aswini, 
Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Pushya,  Uttara,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Anuradha,  Dhanishta 
and  Revati  are  good.  Tuesday  and  Saturday  should  be  avoided. 
Strengthen  the  Lagna  by  placing  Jupiter  in  a Trikona.  Let  there  be  no 
malefic  in  the  6th  house.  The  lords  of  Lagna  and  the  6th  should  be  as 
far  apart  as  possible.  The  Lagna  or  at  least  the  Navamsa  must  be  Aries 
in  order  to  assure  success  to  the  litigation.  If  benefics  occupy  kendras  or 
occupying  the  male  signs,  have  beneficial  aspects,  there  wi  II  be  peace 
between  the  parties. 


Seeking  Escaped  Prisoners.  - Saturday,  Monday  and  Tuesday  are 
favourable  weekdays.  Aswini,  Rohini,  Aridra,  Aslesha,  Pubba,  Chitta, 
Visakha,  Moola,  Uttarashadha  and  Revati  are  auspicious.  The  Lagna 
must  be  in  a movable  sign  aspected  or  occupied  by  Mercury  or  Moon. 
The  6th  lord  should  occupy  the  1 1th  and  be  free  from  affliction.  See  that 
the  Moon  does  not  occupy  the  12th  in  conjunction  with  any  other  planet. 
Make  the  Sun  weak.  If  possible,  let  Rahu  or  Ketu  be  posited  in  Lagna. 
Parivarthana  or  exchange  of  house  between  lords  of  Lagna  and  the  7th 
is  also  desirable. 

Buying  Arms.  - The  most  favourable  constellations  are  Punarvasu, 
Pushya,  Hasta,  Chitta,  Rohini,  Mrigasira,  Visakha,  Anuradha,  Jyeshta, 
Uttara,  Uttarashadha,  Uttarabhadra,  Revati  and  Aswini.  Avoid  Riktha 
Tithis  the  4th.  9th  and  14th  lunar  days.  Sunday,  Thursday  and  Friday 
are  auspicious.  Some  works  recommend  Tuesday  also  as  favourable.  A 
martian  sign  must  be  rising,  or  culminating  and  Mars  must  be  in  a 
dignified  position. 

Starting  Wars.  - Several  standard  works  on  Muhurtha  do  not  specially 
mention  the  constellations,  etc.,  suitable  for  starting  wars.  Planetary 
combinations  for  the  defeat  of  the  enemy  are  given.  However,  by  a 
reference  to  relevant  literature  on  the  subject,  we  have  been  able  to 
gather  the  following  information.  War  must  be  started  on  a day  ruled  by 
Aswini,  Bharani,  Krittika,  Aridra,  Aslesha,  Makha,  Pubba,  Chitta, 
Jyeshta,  Satabhisha  and  Revati.  Of  the  lunar  days  except  the  4th,  9th 
and  14th  the  rest  are  said  to  be  fortunate.  Sunday,  Tuesday  and 
Thursday  are  supposed  to  ensure  victory. 

In  our  humble  view  if  Tuesday  is  selected  Mars  must  be  rendered 
strong. 

The  enemy  is  said  to  retreat  in  confusion  if  the  war  is  begun  in  a Chara 
Lagna  when  the  Moon  occupies  a fixed  sign.  The  enemy  is  also  said  to 
retreat  early  if  the  Lagna  is  Aries,  Leo,  Taurus  and  Sagittarius.  There 
should  be  no  conjunction  of  or  aspect  between  Mars  and  Saturn  if  great 
mortality  and  bloodshed  are  to  be  avoided.  Mars  should  be  elevated 
preferably  if  the  7th  house  or  the  meridian  unaspected  by  any  other 
malefic.  The  Lagna  must,  as  usual,  be  strong. 

Destroying  Strongholds.  - Let  a fiery  sign  be  rising  with  Mars  posited  in 
or  aspecting  Lagna.  A strong-hold  besieged  under  the  influence  of  Aries 
is  bound  to  fall  early.  Similarly,  Sagittarius  ascending  with  Mars  in  it 


would  render  the  collapse  of  any  stronghold  inevitable. 

Making  Peace.  - This  is  an  important  item  in  the  lives  of  nations.  Peace 
must  be  under  a strong  influence  of  Jupiter.  The  ascending  sign  and 
amsa  must  be  either  Pisces  or  Taurus  or  Virgo.  Benefics  should  be 
strongly  placed.  Saturn  must  be  either  in  the  12th  or  in  Upachaya.  There 
should  be  no  conjunction  between  Mars  and  Rahu  or  Mars  and  Saturn 
or  Rahu  and  Saturn.  The  signatories  to  the  Peace  Treaty  must 
themselves  have  their  horoscopes  harmoniously  disposed.  The 
constellations  of  Mrigasira,  Chitta,  Dhanishta,  Aridra,  Swati,  Satabhisha, 
Anuradha  and  Uttarabhadra  should  be  avoided,  as  also  the  4th.  7th, 

8th,  9th  and  12th  lunar  days  and  New  and  Full  Moon  days.  Peace  made 
under  the  following  combinations  is  said  to  last  for  a long  time:  - 

(1)  The  Moon  should  be  in  the  10th  house,  Jupiter  in  the  4th  and  Mars 
and  Saturn  in  the  1 1th  (Mars  and  Saturn  should  not  be  in  conjunction). 

(2)  Jupiter  should  be  in  Lagna,  Mercury  in  the  7th,  Saturn  in  the  3rd,  the 
Sun  in  the  6th  and  Venus  in  the  4th. 

(3)  Jupiter  should  be  in  the  5th  from  Lagna  (which  should  be  Taurus). 
Sun  in  the  3rd  and  Mars  in  the  6th. 

(4)  Mercury  in  Lagna,  Jupiter  in  the  7th  and  the  Moon  in  the  1 0th. 

(5)  Jupiter  in  Lagna  (which  should  be  a fixed  sign).  Mercury  in  the  7th 
and  the  Moon  in  the  10th. 

Will  our  statesmen  pay  heed  to  the  astrological  counsel  and  try  these 
simple  astrological  rules  and  rid  the  world  of  perpetual  threat  to  Peace? 

The  conceit  of  modern  progress  has  no  more  respect  for  ancient  ideas 
then  for  the  forgotten  civilizations  of  old,  even  though  in  many  essentials 
they  have  anticipated  or  outstripped  all  that  we  boast  of. 

CHAPTER  XVIII 
Summary 

In  the  last  seventeen  chapters,  we  have  been  able  to  cover  almost  all 
the  Important  aspects  of  Muhurtha,  a branch  of  astrology  which  is  still 
very  popular,  amongst  all  sections  of  people  not  only  in  India  but  in 
other  parts  of  the  world  too. 


The  rationale  of  Muhurtha  consists  in  appreciating  the  importance  of  the 
time-factor  in  all  human  undertakings.  It  is  an  admitted  fact  that  all 
source  of  life  and  terrestrial  activities  is  the  Sun.  Forces  emanating  from 
thit  glorious  body  vary  in  intensity  and  influence  as  a result  of  their 
contact  with  other  celestial  bodies.  Man  is  himself  a bundle  of  electrical 
currents  and  therefore  there  is  always  a sort  of  interaction  between 
planetary  forces  and  those  incessantly  radiated  by  man.  By  Muhurtha  is 
meant  that  valuable  moment  when  there  is  the  greatest  harmony  or 
resonance  between  human  and  stellar  radiations. 

Horoscopy  is  diagnostic.  Muhurtha  is  preventive  on  prescriptive.  It  sets 
at  naught  the  theory  of  absolute  determinism  and  gives  scope  for  the 
display  of  volition  within  reasonable  limits.  Therefore  even  if  afitictions 
exist  in  the  birth  horoscope  they  can  be  neutralised  or  at  least  lessened 
by  recourse  to  Muhurtha. 

Muhurtha  takes  into  cognizance  the  importance  of  the  radical  Moon  as 
he  indicates  the  mind  and  alt  our  psychological  inhibitions.  Hence 
almost  every  election  is  to  be  so  timed  as  to  have  reference  to  the  birth 
star  and  consequently  to  the  birth  Moon.  Janma  Tara  is  the  ruling 
constellation  while  Janma  Rasi  means  the  zodiacal  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  one's  birth. 

In  electional  astrology,  the  Panchanga,  made  up  as  it  is  of  five  important 
astrological  limbs,  is  of  great  significance.  The  Panchanga  consists  of 
(1)  Tithi,  (2)  Vara,  (3)  Nakshatra,  (4)  Yoga  and  (5)  Karana. 

The  Tithi  is  the  lunar  day.  This  can  be  known  thus:  Subtract  the 
longitude  of  the  Sun  from  that  of  the  Moon  in  degrees  at  a given  time. 
Divide  the  remainder  by  12  and  the  quotient  plus  one  will  be  the  current 
tilhi.  The  remainder  when  subtracted  from  12  and  divided  by  the  diurnal 
motion  in  degrees  will  give  in  day  the  time  at  which  the  lunar  day  will 
change.  Vara  is  of  course  the  usual  weekday  commencing  from  Sunday 
and  ending  with  Saturday.  The  Nakshatra  is  the  ruling  constellation. 

This  can  be  ascertained  thus:  - Reduce  the  position  of  the  "Moon  into 
minutes  and  divide  it  by  800.  The  quotient  represents  the  past 
nakshatra  and  the  remainder  ait  portion  of  trie  next  star.  Then  we  have 
the  Yoga  which  may  be  obtained  thus:  - Take  the  position  of  the  Sun 
and  the  Moon  and  divide  it  by  the  sum  of  their  motions.  The  quotient  as 
usual  represents  the  past  yoga.  Then  we  have  the  last  limb,  viz.,  Karana 
or  haif  a lunar  day.  There  are  27  Nakshatras,  27  Yogas  and  1 1 
Karanas. 


In  Muhurtha,  the  pride  of  place  is  always  given  to  Nakshatra.  Vara  and 
Tithi.  The  other  two  limbs  whilst  no  doubt  important  in  their  own  way  are 
in  actual  practice  of  secondary  value. 

In  selecting  auspicious  times,  due  notice  must  be  taken  of  the  purpose 
in  view.  Each  human  activity  requires  the  strengthening  of  a particular 
house  or  signification  or  the  presence  of  a particular  type  of 
combination. 

Rasis  and  constellations  have  their  negative  periods  also.  Such  periods, 
should  be  rejected  in  all  good  works.  Tuesday  and  Saturday  are 
invariably  bad  for  all  auspicious  works.  There  are  certain  exceptions  for 
this  general  rule.  For  instance,  Tuesday  is  good  for  surgical  operations. 

The  most  important  factors  to  be  considered  are  the  Tarabala  or 
strength  of  constellation.  Chandrabala:  or  lunar  strength  and  the 
Panchaka  or  the  strength  of  the  sum -total  of  five  kinds  of  energies 
called  into  play  at  a particular  moment.  In  all  these  cases  there  are 
exceptions  to  be  noted.  Hence,  in  the  election  of  a Muhurtha,  one 
should  be  very  careful.  Each  constellation  has  its  own  role  to  play  as 
suitable  for  a certain  type  of  activity.  In  fact,  Pushyami  is  considered  a 
constellation  par  excellence.  It  could  be  employed  for  all  purposes  but 
not  for  marriage. 

There  are  twenty-one  great  evils  (Mahadoshas)  being  the  resultant  of 
the  operation  of  the  various  forces.  As  many  of  these  doshas  as 
possible  must  be  avoided.  Of  these,  Kujashtana  and  Bhrigushataka  are 
definitely  harmful  for  marriage  while  the  others  are  equally  evil  in 
respect  of  other  elections.  One  important  consideration  should  weigh 
with  the  Astrologer,  viz.,  that  the  force  of  good  must  supersede  those  of 
evil  for  an  absolutely  good  Muhurtha  is  inconceivable.  Several 
combinations  and  exceptions  are  given  which  would  render  the  forces  of 
evil  either  null  and  void  or  less  harmful.  For  instance,  do  day  of  the 
week  is  blemished  provided  the  lord  thereof  is  strongly  placed.  A 
benefic  exalted  in  Lagna  should  nullify  all  other  adverse  influences,  if 
the  kendras  are  fortified,  sources  of  evil  are  considerably  lessened. 

A certain  weekday  coinciding  with  a certain  lunar  day  and  constellation 
constitutes  a special  Yoga  capable  of  generating  very  good  influences. 
For  example,  Thursday  identical  with  the  4th  lunar  day  and  the 
constellation  Makha  gives  rise  to  Siddha  Yoga,  a highly  favourable 
combination.  These  special  influences  merit  the  attention  of  a student  of 


Muhurtha. 


Of  the  Shodasa  Karmas  (1 6 kinds  of  ceremonies)  prescribed  for  the 
Hindu,  excepting  a few,  the  vest  are  common  to  persons  of  all  castes; 
creeds  and  nationalities  and  they  are  therefore  of  universal  application. 
Nishekam  or  the  first  sexual  act  is  astrologically  very  significant  for  *"not 
only  do  the  radiations  from  these  stars  exercise  an  influence  on  the 
animal  and  human  embryo  but,  since  all  substance,  living  or  inert,  is 
constituted  of  elections  which  are  materialised  radiations,  the  formation 
of  all  organic  beings  on  earth  depends  directly  on  the  influence  of  these 
radiations  on  the  human  egg  at  the  moment  of  conception". 

* La  Grand  Problem  by  Lakhovsky 

The  ancients  have  also  hinted  at  the  possibility  of  change  of  sex  by 
having  the  ceremony  of  Pumsavana  done  when  the  foetus  has  attained 
a certain  age.  Of  the  post-natal  ceremonies.  Upanayana  is  very 
important.  Fixing  a suitable  time  for  this  ceremony  is  indeed  highly 
difficult.  This  should  be  left  to  be  done  by  an  expert  until  the  student  has 
gained  sufficient  experience  which  could  enable  him  to  do  the  work 
independently. 

In  regard  to  marriage,  the  following  suggestions  may  be  carefully  noted: 


(1)  Do  not  begin  the  comparison  of  horoscopes  without  testing  the 
correctness  of  the  castings  submitted. 

(2)  Examine  the  longevity  of  the  bridegroom  and  the  bride.  If  short  life  is 
indicated  either  for  the  bride  or  for  the  bridegroom  do  not  recommend 
the  match  unless  there  are  neutralising  influences  in  either  of  the 
horoscopes. 

(3)  The  7th  and  8th  houses  should  be  carefully  examined.  When  there 
are  many  afflictions,  carefully  find  out  if  there  are  neutralising  influences 
also.  Otherwise  reject  the  match. 

(4)  The  first  condition  is  the  inherent  strength  of  the  horoscope.  Next  in 
importance  comes  the  question  of  examining  marriage  adaptability. 

(5)  A girl  belonging  to  Rakshasa  Gana  should  not  be  married  to  a boy 
belonging  to  Manusha  of  Deva  Gana.  The  reverse  condition  is 


recommended. 


(6)  In  examining  Graha  Maitra  which  is  the  sins  qua  non  of  marriage 
stability,  consideration  should  be  had  not  only  to  the  Janma  Rasis  of  the 
couple  but  to  the  Janma  Navamsa  also.  When  Graha  Maitra  does  not 
exist  according  to  Janma  Rasi,  then  the  latter  must  be  considered. 

Under  certain  conditions  (p.  91)  even  want  of  Graha  Maitra  can  be 
ignored.  All  these  have  to  be  carefully  looked  into  before  pronouncing 
an  opinion.  The  common  Janma  Nakshatra  factor  presents  many 
difficulties  for  a beginner  in  astrology.  The  subtle  distinctions  bearing  on 
this  consideration  should  be  carefully  grasped.  Then  there  is,  the 
question  of  Ku]a  Dosha  about  which  much  fuss  is  being  made  in  this 
part  of  India.  No  horoscope  should  be  rejected  unless  it  has  been 
examined  from  all  astrological  angles. 

(7)  If  the  girl  and  the  boy  have  their  5th  houses  considerably  afflicted, 
then  marriage  between  them  Is  not  desirable.  But  much  of  the  evil  due 
to  these  radical  dispositions  can  be  ovecome  by  selecting  a proper 
Muhurtha. 

(8)  *"ln  the  beginning  of  your  literary  attempts  in  the  astrological  field  do 
not  be-over-confident  or  hasty  in  having  properly  understood  the 
principles  explained  here.  Refer  your  knowledge  to  some  gentlemen 
who  have  much  experience  in  these  matters  and  whose  opinions  you 
ought  to  value  and  compare  with  your  inferences  and  personal 
experiences". 

* The  Astrological  Mirror  by  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao 

(9)  In  marriages,  there  should  be  no  three  or  more  Jyeshtas.  The  eldest 
son  or  daughter  is  called  a Jyeshta.  There  is  the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta 
and  the  constellation  of  Jyeshta.  Therefore  the  marriage  of  an  eldest 
son  or  daughter  should  not  be  done  in  the  constellation  of  Jyeshta  and 
the  lunar  month  of  Jyeshta.  Similarly  if  the  bride  and  bridegroom  happen 
to  be  Jyeshtas  the  marriage  should  not  be  celebrated  either  in  the 
month  of  Jyeshta  or  in  the  constellation  of  Jyeshta. 

(10)  In  fixing  a Muhurtha  for  marriage,  keep  the  7th  house  clean,  and 
6th  and  8th  unoccupied  by  Venus  and  Mars  respectively.  Jupiter's 
presence  in  a kendra  or  trikona  is  very  desirable. 

(11)  When  birth  data  are  not  available,  take  the  Nama  Nakshatra  (see 


Appendix)  of  the  couple.  The  name  of  an  individual's  made  up  of  letters 
or  aksharas,  by  which  is  meant  indestructible  forms  of  sound  vibrations, 
and  when  you  consider  a name,  you  are  only  measuring  the  energy 
content  of  the  individual. 

(12)  Parents  waste  huge  sums  on  Marriage  Shows  such  as  dinners, 
music,  jewels  and  pandals  but  they  are  niggardly  in  paying  proper 
remuneration  to  a deserving  astrologer  who  could  fix  up  a really 
auspicious  moment.  It  astrological  consultation  is  not  to  be  a matter  of 
formality  but  of  serious  importance,  then  the  learned  astrologer  should 
be  paid  properly.  A proper  Muhurtha  will  ensure  the  future  of  the  couple 
and  anything  expended  towards  this  item  is  well  spent.  If  without  caring 
to  consult  an  expert  astrologer,  the  marriage  is  done  and  it  proves  a 
failure,  then  all  the  energy  and  finance  spent  would  be  a sheer  waste. 
Hence  it  is  very  necessary  that  an  expert  astrologer  is  pressed  into 
service. 

General  elections  given  in  Chapter  XIV  comprehend  very  important 
human  activity  and  as  far  as  possible  due  attention  must  be  paid  to  the 
astrological  factors  either  in  regard  to  going  on  a, journey  or  starting  a 
business  or  for  doing  any  important  work.  Auspicious  times  for  day-to- 
day  activities  can  be  fixed  by  any  amateur  astrologer. 

Astrology,  in  relation  to  house  building  is  a very  important  subject,  as  it 
takes  into  account  factors  which  the  architect  and  the  engineer 
generally  ignore.  Materials  assembled  for  the  construction  of  a building 
radiate  different  kinds  of  energies  some  good,  some  indifferent  and 
some  definitely  harmful.  Force  of  evil  accruing  from  such  sources  can 
be  tapped  off  by  laying  the  foundation-stone  and  entering  the  new 
house  at  propitious  moments.  An  amateur  astrologer  should  not  rake 
the  responsibility  of  doing  this  job  as  it  pre-supposes  very  intimate 
knowledge  of  Vastu  Sastra. 

In  the  matter  of  Travel  or  Yatra,  Krittika,  Bharani  and  the  lunar  days  of 
Ashtami  and  Navami  should  be  invariably  avoided.  Journeys  are  also 
prohibited  towards  different  directions  on  different  weekdays.  There  are 
exceptions  for  such  rules  in  cases  of  emergency.  In  selecting  a suitable 
day  for  travel,  a good  lunar  day,  a favourable  constellation  and  a well- 
fortified  Lagna  merit  one's  foremost  attention.  For  short  journeys 
existence  of  Tarabala  is  enough.  For  going  on  pilgrimages  or  important 
errands,  a very  suitable  day  has  to  be  fixed  by  taking  due  note  of  all  the 
important  astrological  factors. 


The  medical  elections  are  intended  to  ensure  speedy  recovery  from 
illness.  There  is  a striking  correspondence  between  the  lunar 
movements  and  crises  in  certain  types  of  disease  and  this  gives  a clue 
as  to  why  a suitable  time  should  be  secured  to  commence  treatment  for 
long-standing  diseases  and  surgical  operations.  Generally  Monday, 
Wednesday,  Thursday  and  Friday  coinciding  with  Hasta,  Aswini.  China 
and  Punarvasu  respectively  would  be  highly  favourable  to  begin 
treatment  for  recurrent  fevers  and  chronic  diseases.  The  time  becomes 
specially  propilious  if  in  addition  to  the  above  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter 
and  Venus  occupy  their  own  vargas  and  a movable  Rasi  is  ascending  in 
Amsa. 

Elections  bearing  on  public  matters  are  of  dubious  value  in  view  of  the 
current  prejudicial  official  attitude  entertained  towards  astrology.  Vet,  as 
in  actual  practice,  astrologers  are  being  consulted  in  private  for  official 
purposes,  the  rules  bearing  on  elections  pertaining  to  public  affairs  are 
bound  to  be  of  some  value.  It  is  hoped  the  day  is  not  far  off  when 
astrology  is  given  its  due  by  the  State  and  recognised  as  the  science 
par  excellence  for  the  solution  of  national  and  international  problems. 
This  expectation  on  our  part  may  induce  a derisive  laugh  from  "men  of 
sobriety"  whose  habit  of  thinking  is  confined  to  a limited  horizon.  But  we 
are  bold  enough  to  say  that  astrology  when  properly  pressed  into  the 
service  of  the  State  would  be  far  more  useful  in  preventing  national  and 
international  complications  than  all  the  paraphernalia  now  employed  by 
the  civilised  Governments  all  over  the  world. 

Concluding  Remarks 

Muhurtha  is  not  the  penance  for  all  the  ills  afflicting  a horoscope. 
Muhurtha  or  an  auspicious  moment  can  neutralise  to  a certain  extent 
the  afflictions  existing  in  a birth  chart  as  affecting  the  various  events. 

If  marital  harmony  is  completely  absent  in  a birth  chart,  Muhurtha 
cannot  confer  on  the  native  marital  harmony.  It  reduces  the  sources  of 
friction  to  a certain  extent. 

Of  the  different  limbs  of  the  panchanga,  viz.,  tithi,  vara,  nakshatra,  yoga 
and  karana,  the  nakshatra  is  very  important.  If  suppose  for  a marriage, 
the  tithi  is  the  6th  and  the  nakshatra  is  Sadhana,  then  the  day  can  be 
selected.  This  is  the  view  of  sage  Brihaspati  and  hence  acceptable  to 
the  other  sages.  But  even  if  other  factors  such  as  tithi,  nakshatra.  etc., 
are  defective,  a strong  Lagna  can  neutralise  such  defects.  This  is  the 


view  of  Narada  and  we  concur  with  this  view.  But  recourse  should  be 
had  to  this  contingency  only  under  special  circumstances,  e.g.,  when  a 
Muhurtha  is  to  be  fixed,  say  for  accommodating  a bridegroom  coming 
from  a foreign  country,  who  has  to  get  back  quickly. 

According  to  Roua,  Jupiter  should  be  rendered  strong  for  marriage; 
Venus  for  travel;  Mercury  for  learning;  Mars  for  war,  fighting;  the  Sun  for 
meeting  with  the  rulers,  government  officers,  etc.,  and  the  Moon  in 
respect  of  all  elections. 

Abhijin  Muhurtha  (midday)  could  be  fixed  for  all  elections,  in  case  a 
really  auspicious  time  is  not  available.  Add  half  duration  of  the  day  to 
sunrise  and  the  Abhijin  Muhurtha  is  obtained.  Suppose  sunrise  is  at  6- 
10  a.m.  (1ST)  and  sunset  6-45  p.m.  The  interval  is  12  hours  30  minutes. 
Half  this,  viz.,  6 hours  15  minutes  added  to  time  of  sunrise,  viz.,  6-10 
(1ST)  gives  the  Abhijin  Muhurtha  as  6 hours  10  minutes  + 6 hours  15 
minutes  = 12  hours  25  minutes. 

According  to  Sage  Bharadwaja  a fully  flawless  Muhurtha  is  unthinkable 
for  years.  Therefore,  fix  up  an  auspicious  time,  with  less  doshas  and 
more  gunas.  Even  sage  Narada  says:  Avoiding  heavy  afflictions 
(mahadoshas),  and  considering  the  ordinary  gunas  and  doshas,  fix  an 
auspicious  time  with  more  gunas.  That  moment  proves  auspicious. 

And  always  see  that  Jupiter  or  Venus  is  in  conjunction  with  the 
ascendant  or  at  least  in  a kendra  or  the  trine  so  that  all  doshas  are 
rendered  infructuous. 

The  sages  appear  to  have  taken  a very  liberal  view  of  things  especially 
in  regard  to  marriage.  For  instance  they  say  that  if  the  boy  and  the  girl 
like  each  other  in  their  first  meeting,  that  should  also  receive  first 
consideration  - (...)  And  when  doubts  arise  between  views  of  different 
astrologers  about  the  agreement  of  horoscopes,  we  are  asked  to  have 
recourse  to  nimitta  (omens)  and  clinch  the  issue. 

The  outstanding  exponent  of  astrology  in  20th  century  was  my  revered 
grandfather  the  late  Prof.  B.  Suryanarain  Rao,  a great  historian,  savant, 
linguist  and  philosopher.  Prof.  Rao  successfufly  defended  astrology 
against  the  attacks  of  ill-informed  critics  most  of  whom  belonged  to  the 
so-called  "educated"  classes.  I conclude  this  work  with  the  following 
extract  from  the  late  Professor's  The  Astrological  Mirror: 


"To  despise  to  hold  a bright  lamp  in  the  darkness  indicates  stupidity, 
while  to  try  to  secure  it  at  any  cost  and  hold  the  same  to  shed  light  on 
our  future  path  really  shows  consummate  wisdom.  Choose  your  own  lot 
as  you  please,  and  either  control  the  planets  and  stand  a victor  in  the 
struggle  for  existence  and  comfort  or  yield  to  their  evil  influences  without 
personal  exertions  on  your  part  and  be  a miserable  coward." 

Om  Tat  Sat 


